---
redirect_from: ["/ch", "/chistory", "/cont-hist", "/history"]
layout: course
author: lili
others:
  - ele
  - tommi
year: 1
semester: 1
link: 'https://www.unive.it/data/insegnamento/218849'
---
# Lecture 2: At the Roots of Globalization

European colonialism, 1450-1750

Learning objectives:

1. Reasons behind Europe’s expansionistic drive
2. The conquer of the Americas and the making of an “Atlantic world”
3. Europeans in Asia: a half-successful mission
4. An early-modern world economy

<br>

## Reasons behind Europe’s expansionistic drive

### A NEW GLOBAL SYSTEM

From the 16<sup>th</sup> to the 19<sup>th</sup> century, a new geopolitical system came into
power; it was a global, spacial hierarchy atop which sat Europe.

### WHY EUROPE?

One key point is the food production capacity in Europe’s moderate
climate, where a fairly good immunity system came to be

The competition between monarchies and the interconnectedness of the
State system helped keep a certain equilibrium

Europe’s seafaring technology (such as the caravel) improved its
capacity to navigate in the oceans

There was a limit in demographic and agricultural growth due to the
exhaustion of land, and thus the continent’s countries saw the need to
expand

The birth of the merchant class actively sought out gold, which it found
in the Americas and used to trade with Asia, bringing Europe to a
position of economic power

Christian religion and a sense of missionary commitment proved Europeans
to be more devout and radical, so to speak; the concept of
‘civilization’, for example, led to Europeans expanding towards other
countries to ‘teach them’ to be civilized (one of the reasons for
conquering the Americas)

The Renaissance and the birth of the sciences furthered the ideological
aspect of Europe’s expansionistic views

### BUT EUROPE WASN’T ALONE IN THE SEAFARING ‘COMPETITION’…

Traders from the Red Sea and along the eastern African coast, plus the
Indian Ocean, China and many other countries, took part in this
seafaring ‘competition’

CHINA: the most economically/technologically advanced area of the world

<u>1600-1500</u>: Chinese seafaring to the Indian Ocean and the Arabic peninsula

<u>1405-1433</u>: Chinese admiral Zheng He led seven transoceanic expeditions to India, Arabic and Eastern Africa

China economically limited itself to its immediate surroundings for political and cultural reasons from the 16<sup>th</sup> century onwards

<br>

## The conquer of the Americas and the making of an “Atlantic world”

### A COMPLETELY NEW ENVIRONMENT ON BOTH RIMS

Europeans first conquered the East and Atlantic islands, where they
introduced systems of exploitation, such as plantation economy, which
was then also employed in the Caribbeans and in South America. The
discovery of the Americas brought about huge demographic changes; on one
hand, it caused the dwindling of local/native population, and on
another, it triggered a huge influx of people from Europe and Africa
(slavery). The Iberian conquerers in Central and South America catalysed
the defeat of previous political and social institutions, such as the
Aztecs, as well as efforts of forced Christianisation. But one of the
main aims of European colonisers manifests itself on an economical
level:

1.  IMPORT from the Americas = tobacco, pumpkin, quinine, turkey, sweet
    potato, squash, avocado, pineapple, peppers, cassava, cacao bean,
    peanut, potato, tomato, corn, beans, vanilla
2.  EXPORT form Europe = coffee bean, peach, pear, olive, citrus fruits,
    banana, honeybee, sugar cane, grains, onion, livestock, turnip,
    grape, disease (smallpox, malaria, influenza, diphtheria, typhus,
    whooping, measles, cough)

As we can see, this exchange was not equal at all. Regarding
colonialism, three types were present in the Ame
ricas:
1.  <u>PLANTATION COLONIES</u> in the Caribbean area, the Eastern
    lowlands and Brazil (already introduced in the Eastern Atlantic
    islands by Iberian powers and European merchant societies linked to
    the aforementioned, such as Tuscany and Southern Italy)
2.  <u>MIXED RACE COLONIES</u> in Mexican and Peruvian highlands
    (minority of Spanish settlers, “mixed” marriage, mestizos)
3.  <u>SETTLER COLONIES</u> in Northern French and British colonies (80%
    majority of European origin because the original population was
    widely exterminate, killed through slave work or by diseases
    imported by the Europeans)

<br>

## Europeans in Asia: a half-successful mission

### PORTUGUESE EXPANSION AND COMPETITION

Through expansion, Europe wanted to find ‘shortcuts’/other routes to
commodities imported from Asia so as to not have to pay more for Asian
products redirected to Europe from the Americas; an example of these
efforts is Columbus’ journey to find a naval route to India, only to
stumble upon America. These precious goods came through other routes,
such as through the Suez Cana, Aleppo or Tripoli.

The Portuguese, for these same reasons, explored the western coast of
Africa. Vasco de Gama sailed around Africa for the first time in
<u>1498</u>, establishing a sea route to India and penetrating the horn
of Africa and the Ethiopian highlands to compete with the sea powers of
the Ottoman Empire, sparking various sea battles in the Indian Ocean.
Slowly, the Portuguese, the Dutch, the British and the Spaniards
penetrated further east, creating sea routes around Africa.

This mission was only ‘half-successful’ because the situation in Asia
was very different from the Americas. There were major empires with
bigger territorial control, thus impeding Europe’s expansion and
conquest. Success was seen only after the Industrial Revolution
(<u>1760-1820</u>), when Europe successfully penetrated (partially)
Indonesia, the Philippines and South East China, but Europe could never
really occupy China or Japan (at a certain point in the 19<sup>th</sup> century, it
remained the only country not occupied by Europeans). Even India was
conquered by the British.

The culture of Asian countries shaped the way they saw the world and
could not be so easily affected by futile attempts of forced
Christianisation. Although these Asian religions were accepting and
willing to hear them out, when Christians began claiming monopoly of
deity and accusing them of idolatry, these brought on conflict between
Europeans conquerers and Asians.

From an economic point of view, Europe had very little to offer to Asia
and desired to acquire this foreign land’s exquisite goods. This
changed, however, with the conquest of the Americas and the commencement
of gold/silver-mining activities, which were used to buy
spices/tea/goods in Asia and export them to Europe.

<br>

## An early-modern World Economy

### GLOBAL EXCHANGE OF GOODS AND PEOPLE

We can summarise the effects of Western colonial expansion as the
creation of an early-modern world economy. The global exchange of goods
and people (mainly under the control of Western European nations)
provided Europeans with many commodities and improved the diets of
Europeans and Asians thanks to the import of American crops (such as
potato and corn). Worldwide financial and trade circuits were mostly
under Western European control, and thanks to the printing press, a mass
dissemination of information deluged the world.

### ITS EFFECTS ON EUROPE

Spain and Portugal lived through a period of trade wealth, concentrating
on sea trade and mercantile activity, but many areas, such as Catalonia
and the Netherlands, became decisive centres of manufacture under
Spanish rule. The gravitational points of European trade, wealth and
manufacture gradually shifted from the Mediterranean to North-western
Europe.

While Sicily had one been described as a sort of ‘paradise on Earth’ for
its wealth and climate, it became classified as a ‘peripheral area’
along with Central-Eastern Europe, and these areas specified in wheat
cultivation and exportation for the wealthier nations of Western Europe.
This warranted the development of new economic systems, such as
‘latifondi’. These weren’t a heritage of Medieval history, but were
rather an effect of industrialisation and modernization.


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 3: The Concept of ‘Europe’

Learning objectives:

1. Is Europe a ‘continent’?
2. Ancient ‘Europe’ and Modern ‘Europe’
3. Christianitas and ‘Christian Europe’
4. Enlightenment and the philosophies of history

<br>

## Is Europe a ‘continent’?

### EUROPE IS NOT A CONTINENT, AND HERE’S WHY

Many scholars of geography believe that the geographical subdivision of
the planet will always engage with political and geopolitical projects.
Luiza Bialasiewicz writes:

“Region-building projects are fundamentally about the (powerful) making
of spaces for political action. Every project of regional mapping or
region building is nothing but a political project translated into
space.”

There is no necessity in saying that Europe is a continent; it is merely
an arbitrary subdivision of the Earth. The predecessors of the early
19<sup>th</sup>/18<sup>th</sup> century translated the ideology of their own present into
spacial categories, such as continents. The continents of classical
geography (the geography of the 19<sup>th</sup> century) were spaces derived from
elements of a theological program (a playbook of world history that
describes stages of human development from the past to the future)
adapted to the Earth’s surface that catalysed a worldwide race of
cultures; this means that the objective differences needed for
distinguishing one continent from another were accompanied by different
judgements of value.

This essentially means that claiming that Europe is a section of the
Earth is arbitrary. The contradiction between the presumed objectivity
of the scientific definition, the reference of ‘continent’ and the
cutout of the landmass are striking; despite the lack of distance
between continents, the lack of natural divisions and the presence of
isthmuses, they are still divided. It is clear that Europe as a material
concept is not a geographical concept.

Europe is <u>NOT</u> a continent. This means that the objective reality
of Europe is something else: it’s a system of division, an abstract
concept made up of myriads of references, an ideology that caused
divisions based on philosophical speculations about history. It is
history that makes geography, and not geography that makes history.
Europe is a spacial metaphor of the meaning of history.

<br>

## Ancient ‘Europe’ and Modern ‘Europe’

### EUROPE: MYTH AND REALITY

All history is contemporary history. The term ‘Europe’ comes from
Ancient Greece, where it had great political and mythological
significance and symbolised the opposition of the West (‘civilized’) to
the East (‘barbaric’), referred to as ‘despotic’. The Greeks felt that
they descended from the East, and this term contained an image of the
self that was looked at through the eyes of an imaginary ‘other’; when
we say we are the Westerners, we imagine that we are being looked at by
someone east of us.

According to the myth, Europe was an ancient woman that never set foot
on land that was considered European. Erodotus proclaimed that such a
denomination would hardly make sense, but he overlooked the fact that
what today many would call an identity needs to incorporate another to
become effective.

After the end of Greek antiquity, for almost 1000 years, Europe’s
mythological and political connotations were lost and the geographical
one only partially drifted away from its original sites and became much
larger. Geographically, Europe appears to have been referred to as a
continental area that did not comprise its barbaric neighbours. It was
later extended to the Peloponnese and its archipelagos, but never to
Crete or Asia Minor (it remained the huge ‘other’).

With Asia, the Greeks meant Anatolia, the Middle East and Persia.
Politically, the word ‘Europe’ referred to the world of the Pòlis, which
was in opposition with the despotic systems of the Persian Empire; it
was particularistic and an expression of Greek pride. The reason why the
myth of Europe lost its political efficacy was attributed to the
emergence of Alexander and the Roman Empire. Particularistic claims of
Greek pride were hard to accept because of its disintegrative potential;
empires must be inclusive because the opposite would destabilise the
empire, and this was very true also when the Roman Empire became
Christian.

This highlights one key difference between Ancient ‘Europe’ and Modern
‘Europe’: the Europe of pre-antiquity was particularistic, but from the
Renaissance onwards, it was universalistic.

<br>

## Christianitas and Christian Europe

### ‘EUROPE’ AS A POLITICAL SPACE METAPHOR

To the dominant theology of the following centuries (Christianity), the
imaginary geographical centre of the world remained Jerusalem, partly
inhabited by ‘heathens’ at the time. Europe was a geographical category
distinguished from the concept of Christianity.

In the late Middle Ages, it was a vague geographical reference and was
replaced by the recurrent use of ‘Christianitas’. In later sources,
Europe was described as Christianity’s ‘last refuge’. During the early
Renaissance, the myth of Europe became more popular than it had been for
a millennium, but at the time of the Crusades (<u>1095-1286</u>) the
term ‘European armies’ were unheard of and substituted by ‘Christian
armies’. The people who came in to invade the ‘Christian’ lands were
referred to the Franks; nobody spoke of Europeans.

‘Europe’ as a concept was recovered by Humanists (powerful men in the
Church, such as Nicholas of Kues and Pope Pius II) in the <u>15<sup>th</sup>
century</u>, when these individuals introduced the term ‘Christian
Europe’ (not seen before) and applied it to the past, such as when
speaking about the Middle Ages (although in the Middle Ages this term
was not known). Antique concepts (the opposition between West and
East/Civil and Barbaric/Free and Despotic) were recovered, and this
further confirmed the Western historical affiliation to the East (like
when Alighieri remarked that the origins of the West lie in the East)
also regarding the origins of Christianity (in Asia) and its troubled
coexistence with Islam, the youngest branch of the same Abrahamic family
tree. This sense of familiarity was rendered visceral both positively
and negatively compared to the neutrality of before. The extreme north
that we now consider Europe was not considered Europe at the time, and
these ideologies mentioned before were nothing new; the Humanists merely
took the Antique’s concept of Europe and transposed it to modern times.

### OLD MAPS OF THE WORLD

In early-modern geography, Europe extended to the Atlantic coast, while
its borders to the North and to the East were not clear; it was
radically different from the Greeks’ concept. It corresponded to the
geographical macro-areas assigned in the early Middle Ages, when the
mythological and political connotations of Europe had already faded. In
cartography, the passage from Antiquity to Christianitas and from
Medieval and Modern/Secularised Europe was radical and featured
nonexistent Eastern borders due to political dispute until the 19<sup>th</sup>
century, when a geographical consensus was reached and it coincided with
the Ural mountains and rivers. Another consensus was reached in the
<u>20<sup>th</sup> century</u> regarding the decision of marking the border of
Europe and Asia along the Caucasus Crest. Up until the <u>13th
century</u>, stylised mapping subordinated Europe geographically to Asia
because this guarded the Garden of Eden and was regarded as the landmark
of the beginning and the end of history.

The extension of seafaring caused a 90-degree rotation of the world map;
modern geography set Europe at the top of the world and maps of these
kind entrenched the new hierarchy of space into people’s minds thanks to
the printing press. This was at odds with the spherical nature of the
Earth, and thus also these modern maps did not reflect the best
geographical knowledge of that age, but rather the peoples’ conception
of the world in which they lived (Eurocentric and ‘superior’).

We can see how the Greeks’ exceptionalism was completely lost and was
replaced by European superiority ensconced in Christian superiority,
according to which only followers of that religion knew the whole truth
of the world. However, this same Christianity was not Eurocentric, as
not even the Pope had a problem with affiliating the religion with
Jerusalem. The new, unprecedented aspect of modern Europe, as a
consequence, was the translation of the typically Christian sense of
history into a new space metaphor, a hallmark of Eurocentrism.

### NEOLOGISM OF CIVILISATION

Therefore, the radical innovation that the Renaissance operated was the
melting of Christianitas into ‘Europe’. This made of the term a
geographical expression of the moral commitment to a universal mission;
Christianity injected the belief that human history is a theological
process of the salvation of humanity and assumed a universalistic stance
(this is why 15<sup>th</sup>-century Europe had universalistic intentions) due to a
new territorial disposition of power and sovereignty (the Ottoman
expansion, etc.).

The same sense of mission was secularized through a diverse narrative of
redemption which can be summarised as ‘neologism of civilization’.
Europeans were charged by history by planting in Africa and Asia the
principles of civilization, human rights, progress and illumination of
Europe, as previously had been the dissemination of the ‘word of the
Lord’. The very concept that history has a meaning is at the core of
that philosophy, even in its most atheist versions. The scholars and
philosophers and important figures of Europe competed to come up with
the most authentic representation of Europe, the truest and
interpretation of the purpose of history.

### FROM THEOLOGY TO SECULAR THEOLOGY

There are many parallels between these two classes of theology; while
the promise of the heavens (represented as an ascent to the kingdom of
heaven to reunite with God) was present in Theology, it was replaced, in
Secular Theology, by the promise of progress towards a society, placing
humanity in God’s throne, so to speak, finally disclosing the true
nature of mankind.

The meaning of history switched from transcendence to immanence, and
humanity became based on hopes for the future and the belief that men
and women can change the world for the better. The driving forces of
history were humanised, and humanity was seen as an actor that could
turn it all upside-down; for Karl Löwith, this is not the case, as the
very postulated history might have a meaning is what distinguishes a
Western philosophy of history: philosophers of this kind believe that
history only has a meaning if there is some transcendent purpose beyond
actual facts. But history is merely a movement of time, the purpose is
its goal. It is not enough to replace God with humanity; the realisation
of true humanity clearly echoes monotheistic eschatology. Humanity
offers no conception of the immanence, but likewise points to the
transcendence of historical purpose.

CONCLUSION: the theological conception of history summarises in itself
the hallmark of European ideology; they simply assume that history DOES
have a meaning and don’t ask themselves if it truly does. They believe
that it’s the duty of Europeans to point out the wrongdoings of the past
and lead the world in the right direction, and it is through this
ideology that Europeans are able to divide the world in good and evil.
This is the cause of the hierarchical organization of the world,
according to Europe, and of the classification of geographical areas
into ‘backwards’ or ‘progressive’ through anthropological parameter;
this concept legitimises European expansion and colonisation.


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 4: European timeline, 1776-1914

Learning objectives:

1. Factors of European worldwide dominance
2. Critics of Eurocentrism
3. Synthesis of European timeline events: the wave of revolutions in
Europe
4. Synthesis of European timeline events: new nations States in
Europe

<br>

## Factors of European worldwide dominance

### THE DECISIVE CHANGE WAS CAUSED BY THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION

The period between the <u>late 18<sup>th</sup> century</u> and the <u>early 19<sup>th</sup>
century</u> was the climax of European power. The Industrial Revolution
played a big part of the latter by assuring Europe unprecedented
dominance all over the world; some of the explanations for this are:

Moderate climates favoured agriculture, cheap raw materials and energy
availability

Europe learned the know-how of manufacture from India and China and came
to rise high above every other area on Earth

Europe had a particular predisposition for scientific discovery and
pragmatic ethics

The competition between the political entities in Europe brought about
motivation for being better than their enemies, leading to benefits for
everyone

<br>

## Critics of Eurocentrism

### CRITICAL OBJECTIONS AGAINST THE EUROPEAN-UNIQUENESS ARGUMENT

There were many similarities between Europe and other areas on Earth;
for example, around the 1750’s, China, India, Japan and the Middle East
also had market-oriented agricultural production, wealthy merchants,
savings for investment, free markets and skilled handicraft industries.
Moreover, the level of living standards were not much behind Europe and
there was demographic growth, as well as birth control. At the time,
China and India produced 57% of the world manufacturing output, while
Europe/America only produced 27%. Great Britain (and other European
countries) only stole the know-how and then made protectionist policies.

But Europe had something that Asia didn’t: colonies. This served for the
accumulation for capital to start industries, and this came mainly from
precious metals that permitted trade with Asia. Also Africa’s raw
materials were stolen through slave labour, allowing Europe to sore
above all other continents. The plantation system that was at the core
of European expansion in the Americas may have modelled and pioneered
patterns of economic activity that became central to industrial
production. Exposure to these new patterns of production and marketing
arguably assisted European businessmen in developing an industrial
factory-based system that operated in a similar manner.

<br>

## Synthesis of European Timeline Events:

The wave of revolutions in Europe

### THE CONGRESS OF VIENNA AND THE NEW WORLD

After the French Revolution, Napoleon had tried to conquer continental
Europe in order to reform and unite Europe under French guidance. He was
defeated in <u>1814</u> and then definitely <u>1815</u> at Waterloo, and
the settlement of the various peace treaties (such as the Congress of
Vienna) lasted one whole year. The political map of Europe was
redefined; this peace plan was overseen by England, Russia, Prussia and
Austria with the purpose of maintaining peace in Europe and to fend off
political revolutions, constitutional movements and republicanism, while
the Ottoman Empire was completely excluded from the treaties. The
political purpose of the treaty was successful until the unification of
Germany and Italy, while peace was maintained for almost 40 years until
the Crimean war in the 1850’s, in which for the first time France,
England and the Ottoman Empire fought against the Czarist Empire.

<u>CONSTITUTIONAL INSURRECTIONS (1820-1825)</u>

After the settlement of a conservative system with the Congress of
Vienna, many liberal movements and protests bubbled to the surface. The
first occurred in <u>1820</u>, when soldiers (which were to be sent to
South America to fight the protests and the independence movement in the
colonies) revolted and forced the government to reinstate the former
liberal constitution of Càdiz. This sparked liberal constitutional
movements in Portugal and Southern Italy (where the figure of Guglielmo
Pepe was prominent) and strengthened International solidarity between
liberal movements. Furthermore, it provoked the Decembrist revolt in
<u>1825</u>.

The next wave of revolutionary upheavals started in France
(<u>1830-1831</u>), where the dissatisfaction of the bourgeoisie caused
them to revolt against their particularly reactionary monarch, who had
imposed restrictions on political participation. He stepped down and was
substituted by another monarch who was more inclined to stick to some
liberal traditions and granted wider political participation.

This signal was received in Poland and in Belgium. The area of Warsaw,
which had been an independent state under Napoleon, was re-established
as an autonomous entity under the ultimate sovereignty of the Czar, who
once appeared to share liberal ideals but proved the opposite . The
Polish became dissatisfied with his rule and revolted, and after months
of successful protests, the Czarist troops crushed them.

The third major upheaval of the <u>1830</u>’s took place in Belgium,
which had been incorporated into the Dutch monarchy by the Congress of
Vienna. The Netherlands had had a diverse selection of rulers and were a
major centre of industrialisation. The population of Belgium didn’t feel
that it was represented in the Dutch state and successfully revolted for
independence. This sparked smaller (unsuccessful) revolutions in Italian
and German areas.

### THE REVOLUTIONS OF 1848/1849

The most significant wave of revolutions occurred in <u>1848/1849</u>,
and the only areas that were not involved were the Iberian peninsula,
Northern Britain, the Scandinavian countries, the Tsarist Empire and the
Ottoman Empire. The main claims regarded <u>constitutions, national
unification and independence, and involved unfulfilled promises
exacerbated by the Congress of Vienna</u>.

These were mostly successful, but there were also <u>fault lines between
revolutionaries</u>; this was a sign that the social, political and
economic landscape of Europe had changed a lot, and the main fault was
between moderate liberals (who were for constitutional monarchy) and
democrats/republicans/socialist forces, and between the bourgeoisie
(more allied with socialists and democrats) and the political
manifestations of the proletarian movement. A third fault line was the
alternative between the two main goals: political participation and
nationalism (violent and was considered more important than ever). Some
examples are the division between Hungarians and Croats during the 1848
revolution or the one between Germans and Czechs. So it became
increasingly clear that revolutionaries, at the notion of a fork in the
road of decisions, preferred to ally with conservative/moderate forces
because the nation was more important than political participation.

The creation of more nation States in the coming decades was a
consequence of the realisation that, although some revolts were quieted,
they could never be quashed completely in the long run.

<br>

## Synthesis of European Timeline Events:

New nation States in Europe (1832-1878)

### THE BIRTH OF NEW NATION STATES

The Greek movement (<u>1830’s</u>) took place in a period of strong
international solidarity and coincided with the upheavals in Spain and
Russia. It was a strong cultural movement, and after it was ended
successfully, there were two other movements that attracted intellectual
attention: the Polish movement and the Italian movement (the
‘Risorgimento’).

National statehood was the main features of European development between
the French Revolution and World War one, also known as the ‘long 19<sup>th</sup>
century’. The most important developments were German and Italian
national unification as these substituted a great number of small
‘buffer states’ developed by the Congress of Vienna to create a sort of
geopolitic equilibrium, while another great development was the retreat
of the Ottoman Empire from the Balkans.


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 5: The Concept of ‘Industrial Revolution’

Learning objectives:

1. Subdivisions of the economy
2. Historical definitions of ‘industry’
3. Industry ‘proper’ and handicraft
4. Structural change in a long-term perspective
5. Industrialisation: definition and geographical diffusion

<br>

## Subdivisions of the economy

The Industrial Revolution that triggered a process of industrialisation,
which brought about structural change within our economy, such as the
transformation of the various <u>economic sectors</u>. These are,
respectively, :

1. PRIMARY SECTOR: The processes of extraction of raw materials which regard <u>mining, electricity, agriculture</u> (the most important sector), <u>fishin</u>g and <u>hunting</u>
1. SECONDARY SECTOR: The transformation of raw materials into tangible goods; includes <u>heavy industry</u> and <u>manufacturing industry</u> (includes handicraft and follows a factorial system)
1. TERTIARY SECTOR: This sector regards <u>the distribution of these tangible goods</u> and <u>the production of intangible goods</u>, that is:
	- trade
	- transportation
	- information
	- financial services
	- social services
	- personal services

These structures disgorged into production systems (such as, to name a
few, feudalism, trading, and the specialisation of certain areas in
different sectors of production) that would feed the political and
social nucleus of civilization (major corporations and political
leaders, who benefit greatly from economic systems that favour
capitalism).

The crux of political power remained agriculture (the Primary Sector)
until the Industrial Revolution. It was then that the Secondary Sector
gained the upper hand over the Primary Sector in terms of both
production and work force; this triggered a major change in our essence
as human beings. Worldwide consumption of energy accelerated in an
incredible manner (entropy), consuming our planet’s energy reserves in a
way that negatively impacted its ecosystems and would also affect us
later on.

<br>

## Historical definitions of ‘Industry'

In order to understand the meaning of the word and render its meaning
homogeneous so as to reach a unitary definition, it would be wise to
take a look at its historic connotations first.

Historically, ‘industry’ was a rather generic word; in latin, it meant
‘being committed to/working on something’. Today, the word has differing
denotations:

1.  Indicates the aggregate of manufacturing/the selection of technically productive enterprises in a particular field (e.g.: ‘the automobile industry’)
1.  Indicates any general business activity or commercial enterprise
    (e.g.: ‘the Italian tourist industry’)
2.  Indicates trade or manufacture in general (e.g.: ‘the rise of
    industry in Africa’)

We are also confronted with different linguistic traditions as well:

1.  In English tradition, with the term ‘industry’, people meant the
    mining industry and all activities pertaining to the Secondary
    Sector
1.  In Italian tradition, on the other hand, ‘industria’ didn’t only
    regard mining and the Secondary Sector, but also many other
    services
2.  Finally, in German tradition, ‘industrie’ referred to mining and
    the mechanised part of the Secondary Sector (handicraft was not
    considered an industry)</u>

The generic word ‘industry’ (that comes from latin) is conditioned by
the fact that the first industrial activities of the revolution
developed in Sectors that were not regulated by trade/handicraft
organizations. One example is the cotton industry, which became the most
important sector in the textile industry and was not regulated by any
corporation.

<br>

## Industry ‘proper’ and Handicraft

The reason it is crucial to dwell on the German distinction of industry
is due to the fact that this distinction became particularly meaningful
because of Karl Marx, as this was at the core of his analysis of economy
in ‘The Capitol’.

At the centre of handicraft-based production, we can find the
workshop-like activities and traditional manufacture, in which there is
a mass production of tangible products via handicraft production. The
tools used are manual tools and instruments handled by the workers
themselves, and thus mass production is significantly limited.

At the centre of industries, however, is a sort of factory system
characterized by the mechanisation of production that replaces
muscle/mental work, which permits mass production on a much larger scale
than in handicraft-based production.

With these facts at hand, it is possible to say that capitalism is based
on wage labour and capital investment and was pre-existent to industrial
production methods. The only differences introduced by the Industrial
Revolution were:

1.  A segmentation of the labour process that made labourers
    interchangeable and expanded the labour market
1.  The allowance of scales of production that enumerated huge
    investment with regards to production

In this way, industrialisation did not create capitalism, but it helped
it become one of the key elements of modern industrial production. In
fact, capitalism, according to the Cambridge Dictionary, is the
following:

An economic, political, and social system in which property, business,
and industry are privately owned and directed towards making the
greatest possible profits for successful organizations and people.

<br>

## Structural change in a long-term perspective

Over the course of a 150 years, what began as an Industrial Revolution
that expanded from England to other parts of the world became a major
catalyst that completely changed the economic structure of the world.
The Secondary Sector prevailed in Europe and North America over the
Primary Sector, but even after the completion of the Industrial process,
structural change continued along lines that led to the pronunciation of
the following sentence by French scholar Jean Fourastiè:

“Nothing will be less industrial than the civilization borne of the
Industrial Revolution.”

What does this mean? This quote refers to the fact that the Tertiary
Sector had already overpowered the Secondary Sector in the 1950’s; this
phenomenon was especially striking in the United States of America, a
country which paved the path to explosive tertiary development in every
other nation. The services sector became more compelling than the
industrial sector in terms of production, and the same is then also true
in terms of employment. This means that the generation born during the
Industrial Revolution later veered towards an expansion of the services
sector instead of the industrial sector, which is what Fourastiè had
indicated with his aforementioned quote.

<br>

## Industrialisation: definition and geographic diffusion

The Industrial Revolution marks the kick-off of a gradual and unhindered
course of Industrialisation; this term indicates a great structural
change of our economy which leads to our production sectors to lean more
towards Secondary and Tertiary production Sectors. The exact date of
commencement of Industrialisation in a nation is hard to pinpoint and
not quite meaningful on a larger scale, but a handy way of specifying
the duration of this process is to observe when it has ended and when
the country’s industry has matured. This is defined by two parameters:
industrial production and employment. Industrialisation is completed
only when industrial production prevails over agricultural production and is further confirmed when industrial employment prevails over agricultural employment. These parameters are used to compare Nation States in order to analyse what might catalyse such changes and how one
country/geographical area influences another.


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 6: The Industrial Revolution in Europe

1750-1914

Learning objectives:

1. The Characteristics of the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain
1. Belgium and Switzerland: a comparison
1. French industrialisation in comparison with the British case
4. Railroads and universal banking: features of German industrialisation
5. Industrial regions in Italy, Spain, the Hapsburg and the Czarist Monarchies
6. Industrialisation in the USA</u>
7. Overview: Wealth, capitalism, urbanisation and demographic development

<br>

## The Characteristics of the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain

The main factors of Britain’s economic process/Industrialisation are
very diverse:

1.  <u>Colonialism</u> (the colonies provided raw materials and changed
    the mentality of the British nobility), <u>mercantile capitalism</u>
    and <u>overseas trade</u>
1.  <u>Corporate enterprise</u> and <u>stock exchange</u>
2.  <u>Agricultural improvement</u>, <u>enclosures</u> and <u>land
    circulation</u>
3.  <u>Political systems</u> (a ‘liberal climate’ was present in Great
    Britain at that time, which was great for investment and
    market-oriented economic sectors and granted political participation
    for the nobility and the upper class) and <u>mercantilism</u> (very
    important for building up a mercantile fleet)
4.  <u>The mentality of the nobility</u> (they became increasingly
    enterprise-oriented and adopted a capitalistic mentality)
5.  <u>The adoption of free trade policies during the 18<sup>th</sup> century</u>,
    which was convenient for them because they were the main trading
    power
6.  <u>State institutions were also very important</u> (the monarchy
    controlled the currency, which was homogeneous throughout the
    kingdom and created optimal circumstances for a stable monetary
    system; protectionist measures were also taken sometimes to boost
    Britain’s own production, such as with the textile industry)
7.  <u>Monetary stability</u> and <u>the banking system</u> that spread
    from the city to the countryside (agriculture became market-oriented
    and the agricultural industry dwindled into enterprises that served
    external markets, such as trade, and investments were made towards
    the agricultural sector through money obtained with primitive
    accumulation, which comes from other sectors; this distinguished
    Britain from continental Europe, where the nobility didn’t even
    think of investing their money is ‘bourgeois’ enterprises; the
    banking system delivered the capital for these investments)
8.  <u>Proto-industry</u> and <u>technological innovation</u>
9.  <u>Transport systems</u> and <u>the development of
    infrastructure</u>
10. <u>Economic geography of Britain</u> (very important because the
    layers of iron and minerals were close to the seaports, which made
    the cost of these raw materials quite low; this was a huge advantage
    compared to France, where coal was imported at a higher price due to
    a timber shortage; coal was originally a resource used only in
    emergency situations)

<br>

## Belgium and Switzerland: a comparison

The first two countries in Europe that completed the Industrialisation
process were Belgium and Switzerland, and although they are small, both
are proof of the dynamics of regional specialisation (certain areas in
Belgium, for example, specialised in the cotton manufacturing industry,
another is a coal district, while yet another is an expert in the wood
and textile industry in the east).

An English immigrant and industrialist, John Cockerill, was the one who
introduced mechanised textile production in Wallonia, close to a nearby
wool district, which is an example of interregional dynamics within the
Industrial process. Cockerill soon came to be a huge,
vertically-integrated corporation that stressed the importance of the
coal industry, the steel industry and the engineering industry, which,
in the first half of the 19<sup>th</sup> century, emerged as the biggest producer
of machine tools, locomotives and steam engines in Europe. European
engineers aided the dispersion of this knowledge in other countries, and
soon the entire continent was following in Belgium’s footsteps.

Furthermore, in the Boring region in Belgium, the coal mines in the
plains needed huge investments. The first common pump was imported from
Britain in the early 18<sup>th</sup> century, and due to a huge need of capital,
the royal institutions and the banks in Belgium formed the Societè
General in order to become stock owners of coal mines (and later on also
of some iron industries). This was the first time banks were directly
involved in industry, and this was one of the major differences between
Belgium and Great Britain. For the first time, financing and banking in
continental Europe adopted a critical role.

Belgium, however, was a place of imitation and where many British and
French entrepreneurs immigrated, and was, quite literally, a ‘photo
copy’ of the British industry.

Switzerland was divided into regions like Belgium and also included a
watch-making industry and a pharmaceutical industry (traces of which we
can still see until today). But regarding private entrepreneurship and
liberalism, nothing here was similar to Great Britain; the Swiss
industrialisation process occurred without smoke and big industrial
towns, differently from Britain. The textile machines were the same as
in every other nation, but they were driven by turbines and water wheels
(thanks to the water rushing down from the mountains), which gave
Switzerland an advantage in the production of electrotechnical
industries. These industries were based in rural sites, and thus the
workers were owners of small lands that were also part-time farmers. The
landscape hardly resembled that of a typical industrialised country
because Switzerland had been able to both preserve its delicate
ecosystems and grant jobs to small labourers in the countryside.

This all together is proof that machine tools, and not the steam engine,
are at the core of the Industrial Revolution.

<br>

## French industrialisation in comparison with the British case

France, along with Russia, was the most populated European country in
the 18<sup>th</sup> century, and was also the culturally and technologically most
developed country in the continent. It was a sort of ‘America’ of the
18<sup>th</sup> century, and so this begs the question: why did France ‘lose’ to
Great Britain in the 19<sup>th</sup> century? Why was Great Britain the pioneer of
Industrialisation, and not France?

Up to the French Revolution, the country seemed to have the best
preconditions:

1.  Corporate entrepreneurship (in the glass, gas, chemicals, and
    sugar industries)
1.  More science-oriented innovations
2.  Seemed fitter to lead the Second Industrial revolution thanks to
    its corporate entrepreneurship
3.  Had the best infrastructure and lands in Europe, while Britain
    was quite poor because the State did not intervene in these
    sectors

It was due to the Napoleonic era that French industrial development came
to a stand-still and came to lag behind Britain during the Industrial
Revolution, and the European market was so protected that technological
innovation was practically null. Some comparative disadvantages
(although greatly exaggerated by French scholars) are:

1. Loss of colonies
1. Less export-oriented
2. The presence of familial capitalism in the textile and iron industry
3. The nobility’s conservative views
4.  The emergence of a Peasantry middle-class ownership of land after
    the Slow Revolution</u> (does not favour population growth, leading
    to slow demographic growth listed in point number 7)
5.  Inability of French agricultural and industrial producers to meet
    the growing worldwide competition for markets after the fall of
    Napoleon (although inventions like the Jacquard loom defy this
    fact)
6.  Slow demographic growth (people migrated to towns an industrial
    demand diminished)
7.  Weaker banking system (Liòn was the only industrialised city
    and banks were only concentrated there; banks mostly invested in
    real estate and agriculture, which were main sources of instability
    that contributed to these banks’ crash)
8.  The economic geography of French territory (the location of
    coal mines and iron mines diverged, and there were no rivers in
    between; especially before the creation of rail-roads, the
    integration between the two sectors could not occur)

The lack of heritage of innovation during the First Industrial
Revolution consequently led to France’s backwardness during the Second.

<br>

## Railroads and universal banking: features of German industrialisation

As a Nation State, Germany did not exist before 1871, but in economic
history, it is convenient to speak of it as a pre-existent region.

The German states differed greatly with regards to the banking sector
and the various monetary systems and was actually quite backward
compared to Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean (e.g.: the use of paper
money was not widespread yet). However, Germany sped up its
industrialisation in the 1840’s/50’s, but it was during the 1870’s/90’s
(the Second Industrial revolution, where the chemical industry and the
sugar industry were trademarks of German industrialisation) that
incredible dynamics emerged. There was no single leading industry in
Germany during the First Industrial Revolution, but railroad-building
could be considered as such.

Railroads are what coal is mainly used for, and thus increased the
demand for coal was greatly increased and the possibility of
transporting it (as well as raw materials) from place to place at a
reasonable cost emerged. Iron and steel were used to actually construct
railroad tracks, and therefore those industries were exploited as well.
The engineering industry was also boosted by the introduction of
railroads and appeared in small towns in which engineers learned the
know-how of industrialisation in French (thanks to the work of John
Cockerill).

Given that Germany was not liberal, but conservative, and that
traditional handicraft corporations were not completely dismantled,
there was a prominent presence of high-quality work force in the
engineering industry as well, which produced amazing German engines that
they could then export at soaring prices.

Railroads integrated the regional and local markets into the national market, boosting many other branches of the industry and rendering the nation’s economy more or less homogeneous. A huge amount of capital, however, was needed in the creation of railroads, and the way Germany was able to accumulate enough capital to do so was by building off the joint stock banks (this became a feature of German industrialisation). These banks were not specialised and they were spread throughout the entire territory, not limiting themselves to nobility. Banks became a
sort of public institution that had great influence on new industrial projects (like steel works) and integrated finance and industry.

<br>

## Industrial regions in Italy, Spain, the Hapsburg and the Czarist Monarchies

The aforementioned countries weren’t the only ones who hit their peak of Industrialisation before World War One:

1. In Spain (Catalonia), there was an old industrial region that participated in the first wave of Industrialisation and, thanks to its widespread textile manufacturing, was fully industrialised by 1900
1. In Italy, Piedmont and Lombardy had flourished as industrial regions during the first wave and were also fully industrialised by 1900; meanwhile, Liguria industrialised as a maritime terminal of the industrial heartland, while major industrial sites opened in Veneto (wool), Tuscany (metallurgy, engineering) and a few other regions
2. The Hapsburg Empire, on the other hand, featured old industrial textile regions in Bohemia and central Austria (where an important metallurgical and engineering industry also bloomed), as well as Vorarlberg; two other important areas are Budapest (home of the electrotechnical industry) and Trieste (featured shipyards)
3. Finally, the Russian Empire only showed a great effort in industrialisation after 1880 in an explosion of state railroads, the birth of a national coal, iron and steel industry, and the creation of important industries in major urban areas such as Moscow, St. Petersburg and Poland; this, along with the foundation of foreign banks and tax exemptions for foreign capital, assured that by 1905 the Empire would boast 2 million factory workers, thus making it a strong industrial country, but not an industrialised one

<br>

## Industrialisation in the USA

### USA AND THE REST OF THE WORLD

The preconditions of this industrial development were very diverse; the
USA had a large population, and thus the domestic market size was bigger
than that of European countries. What was even more important was that
the USA was abundant in capital goods while Europe had to scramble to
its colonies in order to obtain raw materials. This made a huge
difference: the wage level in the USA was high (due to lack of
competition), as well as the demand for consumer goods. In Europe, on
the other hand, low wages favoured industrialisation but limited the
demand of the working classes.

While Europe sought out technological innovation to save capital input,
all the technological efforts were destined to save labour in the USA,
and not capital. Building cheap cars at the assembly line in America was
completely feasible due to the copiousness of raw materials, and so the
rationalisation of consumer goods industry in Europe lagged until the
1950’s (where a process of ‘Americanisation’ accurate, during which the
economic trajectory in Europe changed as well; an example of this shift
is how the wage levels equalised during the great migrations from Europe
to America). Marketing was a key element in the United States’ economy,
while it was inconsequential in Europe (regarding the production and
advertisement of consumer goods).

### ASIA AND EUROPE

GDP per capita is the most common measure of average productivity of a
country. In the 1500’s, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Japan,
India and China were pretty much at the same level until the mid 17<sup>th</sup>
century. After 1650, northern Europe took the lead (especially Britain
and the Netherlands), while the Asian countries fell behind. India and
China became poor countries, while only Japan was able to start its
industrialisation process after the 1850’s; India and China only started
to recover after 1980.

<br>

## Overview: Wealth, capitalism, urbanisation, and demographic development

The leading industries during the Industrial Industry were:

1. 1760-1840: textiles, coal, iron, steam engine
1. 1840-1880: railways, steamships
2. 1880-1920: chemicals, steel, electricity, internal combustion motors, automobiles

The effects on wealth and economic growth were:
1. An increase in productivity through mechanisation in the cotton industry from 1750 to 1825
1. An increase in productivity in the iron industry in Great Britain from 1790 to 1860
2.  An increase in income per capita, especially in Great Britain, France, Germany, Italy and the USA

With regards to population growth, Europe swelled from 150 million to
400 million inhabitants during the time frame between 1750 and 1900.
Along with this, urban population expanded from 17% to 54% between 1801
and 1891, while the principle of the market was extended to the whole of
the economy; labour became a commodity and urbanisation and the market
deeply transformed social structures and mentalities.


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 7: The American Revolution of 1776

Learning objectives:

1. Puritan eschatology
1. The conflict between the British crown and its American colonies
1. The Declaration of Independence of 1776 and the Constitution of
1787
1. Slavery before and after Independence
1. Westward expansion and native population
1. Democratic representation and social structure

<br>

## Puritan eschatology

American colonies were only founded by its conquerers in the <u>17<sup>th</sup>
century</u>, and the political, cultural and religious beliefs that
would be present there were brought in by settlers from Europe (in
particular, Great Britain), a continent riddled with religious and
political conflict.

One crucial group of settlers was the Puritans, who organised themselves
in the form of joint stock companies; very often, the governors of
States (such as John Winthrop, Massachusetts’ first governor) were also
the heads of these companies, and thus these companies were comprised of
a political, spiritual and entrepreneurial elite. Their ethos was close
to protestantism and eschatology, and their main aim was to build a ‘new
England’/a ‘new Zion’ in the colonies.

Another important ideology present in the colonies derives from John
Locke’s theories, which mainly focused on the concept of liberty:

“The natural liberty of man is to be free from any superior power on
earth and not to be under the will or legislative authority of man, but
to have only the law of nature for his rule.”

Lastly, one of the other key trains of thought ‘departing from its
station’ at the time was the one linked to the English political
theorist of classical republicanism named James Harrington, and it had
more to do with the proposition of a free State and the virtue of its
arm-bearing citizens.

<br>

## The conflict between the British crown and its American colonies

The American Revolution can also be considered as one of the
consequences of the <u>Seven Years’ War</u>, which extended over many
continents and ended successfully for Great Britain.

At the end of the war (1763), France cede all mainland North American
territories (except New Orleans) in order to retain the Caribbean sugar
islands. Britain, on the other hand, gained territories east of the
Mississippi river, leaving Spain with territories west of the
Mississippi (the country also traded Florida for Cuba). These events
constituted the first instance of friction between the American colonies
and Great Britain, who wanted to pacify them.

Another aspect that upset the land speculators and real-estate companies
among the American settlers was that, in 1763, king George III
prohibited the extension of settlements west of the Appalachian
mountains, and thus the heads of the real estate companies became the
leaders of the Revolution. Furthermore, the king also intervened in
colonial affairs by granting religious freedom for the French Catholics
of Louisiana, ‘offending’ the colonies’ claim to their ‘right’ over
territories in the west.

Soon, a debate developed in Great Britain about the legitimacy of
slavery, and the American settlers feared an abolitionist decree.

But the most important aspect is the quarrel of the finance of the past
war and the defence of the companies; the monarchy had to raise taxes in
order to finance the military and to pay off its accumulated debts,
first with the Sugar and Stamp Acts (1765), and then with the Revenue
Act (1767). The Americans felt that this was a great injustice and came
up with the famous phrase, ‘no taxation without representation’.

The revolution broiled until new British troops arrived at Boston in
1678, and, as a sign of protest against tea taxation, American settlers
threw tons of tea overboard from ships of the East India Company in what
is known as the Boston tea party (1773). As a consequence, Massachusetts
was stripped of self-government and the colonies boycotted British
goods. The Continental Congress decided to meet for the first time in
1774.

<br>

## The Declaration of Independence of 1776 and the Constitution of 1787

The commanding chief of the Continental Army was George Washington, and
the first armed conflict of the Revolutionary War occurred in
<u>1775</u>. This led to the Continental Congress’ emanation of the
Declaration of Independence on the <u>4<sup>th</sup> of July, 1776</u>; but the war
took a twist when, in <u>1777</u>, British and American loyalist (a
number of other troops were also present, some of them on the side of
the British, such as a lot of slaves that hoped for the abolition of
slavery, while some sided with the settlers, especially the French
troops, who wanted to take revenge for the horrors of the Seven Years’
War; one of the French commanders was General la Fayette) forces
surrendered at Saratoga on the <u>13th of October</u>. On the <u>1<sup>st</sup> of
March</u>, <u>1781</u>, the Articles of Confederation were ratified, and
on the <u>18<sup>th</sup> of October</u>, the British forces surrendered. Many
other important events followed, such as the Peace Treaty of Paris in
<u>1783</u>, the adoption of the American Constitution in <u>1787</u>
and the vote for the Bill of Rights in <u>1791</u>.

<br>

## Slavery before and after Independence

The role of slavery during the American Revolution has been recently
revisited and has challenged the original narrative of ‘freedom for all’
that has been preached by American historians for decades. The reality
of slave houses and plantations (especially in the Southern colonies)
was at odds with the values of freedom and liberty, and more recent
studies point out that Africans in the American colonies took arms on
the side of the British, while the slave holders pushed for the
revolution to prevent the introduction of an abolition decree. Freedom,
for the founders of the United States, meant the freedom to keep others
enslaved, and a strand of that argument can be found in John Locke’s
theory. The American Revolution therefore centred on Americans’ right to
control their property (which included other human beings) and
reinforced the States’ commitment to keep the slave industry alive and
kicking.

Slavery was outlawed in most northern States after the end of the war,
but this only freed children when these turned 25 years old, and racism
still persisted (as we can see in a Massachusetts law of <u>1786</u>
that prohibited whites from marrying African Americans, Indians or
people of mixed race).

Doubts about the moral aspects of slavery never really took serious hold
among white folk in the Lower South. In fact, after the Mexican
Revolution, US slaveholders settled in Texas, completely disregarding
Mexican legislation. When the war between the US and Mexico broke out in
1836, Texas already had 5,000 slaves. When Texas joined the United
States in 1845, the state was home to at least 30,000 slaves, a number
which swelled to 58,000 in 1850.

THE AFTERMATH OF THE CIVIL WAR

After a four-year Civil War (<u>1861-1865</u>) between the United States
and 11 slave-holding Southern states, these all formed the Confederate
States of America. Regarding slavery, things took a turn in 1865 with
the 13th Amendment (passed by Congress on <u>January 31<sup>st</sup>, 1865</u>),
which states:

“Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for
crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist
within the United States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction”

What ensued was a mass incarceration of African-Americans in order to
legally keep them as slaves. From <u>1875</u> to <u>1965</u>, State laws
and local regulations came into existence that enforced racial
segregation (apartheid) in the USA, especially in the Southern States.
Only under the pressure of the Civil Rights movement did the States
start the process of overcoming Jim Crow in <u>1964</u>, a racist
caricatural character of African-Americans that has been present since
the <u>1820s</u>.

<br>

## Westward expansion and Native Population

With the Revolution, a process of territorial expansion began. The
United States first started expanding its territory with the Treaty of
Paris, proceeding both Westward and Southward, conquering land through
wars and peaceful treaties, such as with Mexico. On a diplomatic level,
it was still in the logic of colonial territorial administration (such
as with Mexico and Alaska, which was purchased in the <u>1860s</u> by
the USA from the Czarist Empire for 7.2 million dollars), but this was
not the case with many native populations. On these lands lived a
consistent number of native Americans who had deported to these areas by
the settlers themselves. The conquer of these regions was seen by
Americans as a conquer in the name of ‘civility’. The conquer, once
completed, continued in the direction of the Pacific Ocean (Hawaii) and
on to places like Cuba. It was also seen as the conquest of ‘virgin
land’; according to the legal philosophy of colonising European
countries, savages who lived on a land and did not work it had no notion
of the modern legal theory regarding private property extending to the
land, and thus had no right to the possession of said land; they were
the ‘illegal’ dwellers that were then dehumanised by settlers. It was a
systematic genocide.

<br>

## Democratic representation and social structure

The American Constitution reflects the traditions of political thought
in the 18<sup>th</sup> century and American society.

Social structure:

1. SLAVES: Slavery of Africans existed in all the British American colonies.
1. FREE BLACKS: The British American colonies had a small but important population of free men and women of African decent.
1. FARMERS: During the 18<sup>th</sup> century, most Americans lived and worked on small farms.
1. MIDDLING TENDENCIES IN THE SOCIETY: In the 18<sup>th</sup> century, a new group gained a larger role in society and
government. These men and women worked in trades or as professionals,
such as lawyers and doctors, or merchants who owned stores.
1. GENTRY: The gentry were the ‘upper crust’ of colonial society. They were the
large landowners, very wealthy merchants and financiers.

The political system is the following:

1. The people elect members of Congress and the President
1. Congress approves the Cabinet’s (executive body) decisions and has the power of impeaching the President
2. The President nominates members of Cabinet

The people who had a right to vote for the first American Congress were
the following:

1. 60-80% of white adult male citizens
1. Many poor white, and most of the black, both free and enslaved, were excluded
2. Women were excluded
3. Natives were excluded
4. Nevertheless, the right to vote was much more ‘general’ than in most European liberal systems of the 19<sup>th</sup> century

<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 8: The French Revolution and the Napoleonic period, 1789-1814

Learning objectives:

1. Major turning points of the revolutionary process
2. A new concept: “sovereignty of the people”
3. The Nation as religion
4. Peoples’ sovereignty and the rule of law
5. France 1789-1814: a laboratory of different possibilities

<br>

## Major turning points of the revolutionary process

The French Revolution originated from social discontent triggered by the
economic difficulties of the lower class and the discontent of the
growing social class of the bourgeoisie, who did not have the
possibility of being politically represented; they possessed great
economic power, but no political power. The immediate triggers were,
like in the States, were fiscal crisis (the wars that France had waged
around the world had been quite expensive and caused the monarchy to go
into debt; for this reason, they introduced unsuccessful financial and
monetary reforms, causing quarrels), and the following protests which
emulated those of the American Revolution (which was viewed very
positively in France). Elected representative bodies of the three
Estates had not been called in since <u>1614</u>, but the King called it
in again in the spring of <u>1789</u> to have the consent of the French
population regarding these taxes. The elections were held at the end of
a process of broad political mobilisation, in which the bourgeoisie
wanted political participation and the urban working classes wanted
improvement and political participation. There were quite high tensions
when the Third Estate (the common people), having negated that every
deputy would have one vote, declared itself the National Assembly. After
the storm of the Bastille (<u>July 14<sup>th</sup></u>), King Louis XVI recognised
its validity, and the Assembly adopted the Declaration of the Rights of
Man and of the Citizens.

What followed was a suppression of religious orders (which created a
popular, counter-revolutionary movement mobilised by the clergy and by
some peasants) and the abolition of feudalism and the nobility, and
political parties such as the Gironde, the Cordeliers and the Jacobins
grew in power. In September of <u>1791</u>, a Constitutional Monarchy
(which had already existed during the Revolution) was established thanks
to the brand new Constitution. Foot riots ensued in Paris, followed by
popular upheaval against the monarchy. Following some international
developments, King Louis XVI was arrested and guillotined in <u>1793</u>
when the most important outbreak of counter-rebellion sparked in the
Vendèe. After this, the Committee of Public Safety was formed, and the
most important figure was Robespierre. This was a radical acceleration
of the Revolution, since he was a member of the Jacobins, a group which
came to control the majority of the National Assembly and executed the
majority of the Girondists to gain control. Under their control, the
<u>1793</u> Republican Constitution was ratified by a popular
referendum, allowing universal male suffrage.

At this very moment, riots were suspended because the Committee of
Public Safety established the Reign of Terror to fight back and
terrorise the ‘enemies of the Revolution’ (Girondes and Cordeliers); but
during this process, nearly everyone was in danger of being accused of
being one. A year later, monarchist forces and Girondist forces fought
back and declared Robespierre and his allies the real enemies of the
Revolution. Robespierre then executed himself.

A moderate period of the Revolution began with more conservative and
monarchist political views, meaning that the progressive Constitution of
<u>1793</u> was substituted by a Moderate-Liberal Constitution which
limited political participation to the nobility and introduced a new
form of execution. In a certain way, it harkened back to the Girondists’
views and urged expansionistic wars in Europe and Africa; Napoleon
Bonaparte emerged, who proposed to ‘civilize’ these new territories. In
<u>1798</u>, he was defeated in Egypt and had to turn back to France in
<u>1799</u>. Nevertheless, he was seen as a hero and he took his
popularity to organise the Coup d’Etat of 18 Brumaire, an event which
marked the end of the Directory and the introduction of another
Constitution (which foresaw the leadership of a restricted number of
people, which included Napoleon, who was elected as First Consul), in
which a Consulate was established (all of this was founded on general
assent ratified by a popular referendum, whereas the Directory was
restrictive).

There were a number of clashes during the Revolution, the symbolic
meaning of which was superior to their military weight. The most
important was the Storming of the Bastille, in which the bourgeoisie
defeated the noble troops. From that moment on, Paris was in the hands
of the Revolution, and events like these demonstrated the social
heterogeneity of the Revolution. The Municipality would be under the
control of the poor, the working class and the bourgeoisie, who wildly
accelerated the Revolution. The National Assembly represented the
moderate majority of France, and their best instrument to qualm the
broiling capital was the National Guard, which was under the command of
La Fayette.

In the early days of the Revolution, there was a great wave of sympathy
for the Revolution outside of France, but there was also a strong
reaction against it. Edmund Burke was an Irish statesman who served as a
member of the British house of commons for over thirty years. In the
<u>1770’s</u>, he had supported the American Revolution, yet durig the
late <u>1780’s</u>, his position contrasted greatly with that of the
sympathisers of the French Revolution. His book, ‘Reflections on the
Revolution in France’, became a European bestseller and was translated
into several languages; it was the most influential text against the
Revolution at the time. His concept of legitimacy and geopolitical
equilibrium that had been destroyed and the responsibility of Europe
with regards to this became major points in the Congress of Vienna. When
writing his book, the execution of King Louis XVI was still beyond his
imagination, and yet he was outraged by what he had already seen (such
as the Women’s March on Versailles in <u>1789</u>, a movement which
forced the King and Queen to wear the Phrygian cap, a symbol of the
Revolution). Burke wondered what could hold a political society
together, and he came to the conclusion that it was the recognition of
the constituted authority of governors, good manners, religion and
traditions.

<br>

## A new concept: “sovereignty of the people”

The Revolution brought about ideological innovations, such as the
sovereignty of the people, which rearranged the political meaning of the
concepts of ‘people’ and ‘nation’. During the Ancien Règime (refers to
the biological descent of the nobility and the clergy and implies their
dominance in the hierarchy of soicety), the term ‘people’ referred to
the individuals excluded from political decision and was a generic name
for the amorphous mass of humans that had no say in the direction of the
nation. This perspective was turned around during the Revolution, and in
early <u>1789</u>, Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès published the pamphlet ‘What
is the Third Estate’, which would become a founding text of the
Revolution and of the concept of the people’s sovereignty in Europe. Not
only did Sieyès’ view of the ‘people’ correspond to the Third Estate,
but he also claimed that it was the common people who formed the true
nation. To argue this, Sieyès refused legitimacy through biological
descent to point at citizenship and democratised this same principle:
the noble conquerers either had to give up their privilege or return
from whence they came from, that is, the forests of Bavaria (in this
way, he weaponised their claims of biological nobility and introduced
mythical legitimisation for the concept of sovereignty). In conclusion,
those who dwelled on French soil for generations were the only genuine
form representation of the nation.

<br>

## The Nation as religion

The mythical foundation of the people’s sovereignty was clearly a part
of Revolutionary language: according to Robespierre, a sovereign
individual is one who establishes its own new legitimacy of power
derived from the eternal laws of reason, justice and nature. Robespierre
also claimed that <u>the people were sacred through the sacred laws of
nature</u>, while the King wasn’t, and thus that his authority was
merely a farce. The allegories and the symbolism of the Revolution also
confirmed the existence of this process of sacralisation, as concepts
such as justice or nature or humanity were depicted as goddesses who
fought back the evil spirits of obscurantism. This radical sacralisation
culminated in the Parliamentary decision that the Supreme Being existed
and that its veneration should be a public affair.

One of the most perceptive observers of the French Revolution was the
early Romantic poet, Novalis; his <u>1799</u> pamphlet, ‘Christianity or
Europe’, is not wrongly considered the founding manifesto of modern
conservatism. Like Burke’s essay, it is a concise critic of the
Revolutionary project. Yet, the text also reveals significant passages
of appreciation. Indeed, for Novalis, the French Revolution <u>marked
the end of the political realisation of the Enlightenment</u>. According
to Novalis, the philosophers of this period had disparaged morality and
the love of art, purging poetry of nature and the human soul; from his
point of view, the French Revolution sent a signal of regeneration
because <u>these same Revolutionaries restored passion, religion and the
concept of sacralised nature in a historically remarkable manner</u>. In
this way, politics became a matter of mass communication from the end of
the Revolution onwards. This poet anticipated the principles of
political communication in the coming era of the peoples’ sovereignty.

<br>

## Peoples’ sovereignty and the rule of law

Enlightenment thinkers like Montesquieu, Kant and Plato were hostile to
democracy, which they only deemed the first step towards tyranny and the
complete opposite of the Republic. The early liberals came up in the
moderate part of the Revolution and shared Montesquieu’s and Kant’s
<u>skepticism of democracy</u>, in which we can discern a concern for
social and economic power and a concern for the rule of law. All along
the <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u>, most liberals fought against democracy,
because, by extending the right to vote for the lower classes, it would
threaten the bourgeoisie’s power. They saw the rule of a socialist
majority as a threat to sacred property rights; at any rate, the concern
for the rule of law should be carefully taken into consideration. Why
have plebiscites always marked the beginning of modern dictatorship in
the 20<sup>th</sup> century? Hitler and Mussolini were incited by widespread
popular consent. Montesquieu believed that the sovereign should be
beneath the law, regardless of the social and philosophical connotations
of this term. The people shouldn’t be the exclusive source of political
legitimacy; weakening the distinction between sovereignty and political
power would cause an imbalance and put the people above all others by
following this radical concept of ‘natural superiority’. In the National
Assembly, the legislative body of the people was entitled to absolute
and unlimited sovereign power because it was a result of general will
and national justice. The emergence of popular sovereignty and the
Constitution divided them, subjecting political power to the control of
counter-powers and caused the sovereign people to become more absolute
and theoretical. <u>Integrating them more into political life would
cause the foul smell of tyranny to spread, such as during the emergence
of Napoleon and when he was crowned as Emperor.</u>

<br>

## France 1789-1814: a laboratory of different possibilities

If we look back at the twenty-five years that separated the end of
absolute monarchy in France (<u>1789</u>) and its restoration in the
Vienna Congress (<u>1814</u>), we can see that this period in France and
Europe constituted an extraordinary laboratory of different political
and constitutional possibilities, which delineated the possibilities
that would be seen in the following two-hundred years:

1. Absolute monarch (<u>1789</u>)
2. Constitutional monarchy (<u>1789</u>)
3. Republican constitution of democratic character (<u>1793</u>)
4. Emergency regime of terror (<u>1793-94</u>)
5. Moderate elitist liberal rule (<u>1794-1799</u>)
6. Authoritarian populist rule (<u>1799-1804</u>)
7. Monarchic dictatorship (<u>1804-1814</u>)
8. Restored absolute monarchy (<u>1815</u>)

<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 9: Liberalism, Socialism and Feminism

Learning objectives:

1. ‘Liberty’ before Liberalism
2. Liberalism as a political movement
3. The Emergence of a Socialist movement in the 19<sup>th</sup> century
4. The Feminist movement and Women’s Rights before World War One

<br>

## ‘Liberty’ before Liberalism

Over the last decades, the history of political thought and conceptual
history has criticized the self-narrative of liberalism, which dated
itself back to the 16<sup>th</sup> century and put the school of thinkers of
natural justice onto a single line of tradition. ‘Liberal’ as a
political adjective was only coined in the 1800’s and then morphed in
the early 19<sup>th</sup> century into the ‘liberalism’ we know today. ‘Liberty’,
instead became a central concept of human thought from the early
Enlightenment onwards thanks to individuals like Hume, Kant and Locke,
and was inserted in this liberal mainline of ancestry; this is correct,
yet on the other hand, this does not mean that we can necessarily place
them on a strand of intentional tradition because the political outcomes
these thinkers had in mind weren’t necessarily the same that
19<sup>th</sup>-century liberals would speak about later on. John Pocock and
Quentin Skinner argued that there wasn’t just one meaning of liberty:

<u>The contractarian tradition:</u> concerned with maximising individual
freedom and wealth under the condition of a political society
(commonwealth)

<u>The Roman republican tradition:</u> reactivated by Macchiavelli and
others, and was concerned with the freedom of the political society
(republic) as a whole depending on individual virtue

Other main events in this period (such as the Dutch Republic, the
English period of Civil War and Revolution and the American Revolution)
also pertained to both strands of liberty.

<br>

## Liberalism as a political movement

Differently from the concept of ‘liberty’, ‘liberal’ still had no
political meaning in the <u>18<sup>th</sup> century</u> and referred to social and
moral customs, as well as tolerant or loose moral habits. It became an
adjective with a political connotation during the French Directorate
(the moderate period of the French Revolution); it then became a
fashionable word in the European establishment, especially regarding
Napoleon and Czar Alexander I, who both referred to themselves as men
with liberal principles. The liberal movement was born in the
<u>1820’s</u>, and at the time it was strongly characterized by
international solidarity and freemasonry during the Restoration period,
and its main areas of interest were Spain, Portugal, France, Italy and
Greece.

Only during the first half of the <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u> was this great
strand of ideas identified as ‘liberalism’, a standard reference to
French and European moderate bourgeois political ideals, and often in
favour to constitutional monarchy. After the <u>1848</u> revolutions,
liberal groups and parties emerged under that name that had
distinguished themselves from conservatives during the revolution on one
hand, and democrats and republicans on the other. The most important
philosopher of Liberalism was John Stuart Mill, who said that <u>“people
understand their own interests better and care for them more than the
government does or is expected to”</u>; this was said in a period when
it became clearer that the government wouldn’t be the night guardian
that would only grant society, but also take over administration and
control of infrastructures, a development that liberals didn’t see as
positive.

Great changes came in the <u>1860’s</u>, when the former British Whig
Party (of Lockean traditions) changed their name into Liberal Party.
With regards to Europe, the great time of Liberal parties ended in
<u>1918</u> with the transformation of constitutional monarchies, mass
society and the mass extension of the right to vote. In the USA, on the
other hand, the adjective ‘liberal’ had no great appeal until the
<u>1930’s</u>, when it became identified with moderate State
intervention and social politics, and a commitment in favour of civil
rights.

<br>

## The Emergence of a Socialist movement in the 19<sup>th</sup> century

To understand why the question of socialism and communism will be an
aspect that will persist in the following years, we also have to
understand that the emergence of the concept of <u>private property on
land</u> (which was the main factor) in Europe was historically seen as
relatively new, and it was argued by the first thinkers of natural
justice as a social contract with work, and that people who worked the
land were quite right to refer to it as their exclusive property.
‘Privatus’ (from latin) means that there is something subtracted from a
greater common good, something of common use made into an object of
private use. These thinkers claimed that this was a natural right
because it was the fruit of someone’s work.

In the early 19<sup>th</sup> century, classical economy (Marx and Ricardo) fully
recognised that the only source of wealth is work; they believed that
other factors of production (capital or land) did not increase the plus
value of wealth in a society. This led to private property of means of
production (esp. of land) to always be a little bit on the defensive.
The aforementioned was extensively discussed by thinkers of natural
justice and also by marginalist economists (who relativised the meaning
of labour). The promise of overcoming the private property of means of
production and erecting socialist society grew in Europe; the effects of
social polarisation were clear in European society and were a matter of
discussion and of efforts of change (e.g.: during the French Revolution
with Babeuf).

One of the most important thinkers of this age was Henri de Saint-Simon
(<u>1760-1825</u>), who founded a more technocratic view (<u>he argued
in favour of State-organised industrial production and distribution</u>)
of industrial society, which was a very influential concept in the
international technocratic tradition.

During the <u>1848</u> Revolution, there were efforts in France to erect
working houses to abolish unemployment and create reservoirs of
socialism under the protection of the State. There were also thinkers
who thought that in the middle of the social environment of the liberal
societies, the best thing to do was to begin to form a community that
would put into practise communist forms of living; an example of one of
the supporters of this was Robert Owen (<u>1771-1858</u>), who advocated
the transformation of society into smaller local communities. He also
vouched for <u>no child labour, schools, free healthcare and affordable
food</u> in a New Lanark village, and he also formed a tightly-knit
socialist community in New Harmony, Indiana, which followed ideals like
<u>8-hour workdays and moneyless trade</u>. His model was not emulated
as he had thought it would be, however.

Similarly, from within this set of liberal thinkers emerged the
anarchists (‘libertarian socialists’), who were a sort of <u>liberal
left wing</u> rather than of the socialist movement because they do not
wish to give the State a key role in society. They were prominent in
many European countries in the mid-19<sup>th</sup> century, such as Switzerland,
Spain and Russia. These various strands of thought were called ‘utopian
socialism’ by Marx and Engels, who opposed against these due to their
lack of political feasibility because they did not analyse the laws of
history in a philosophical manner. Instead, they proposed an analysis
(Marx’s economic analysis of the capital) in the Communist Manifesto
(1848), in which they spoke of building in this idea of overcoming the
contradictions introduced by capitalism in a way that was in line with a
scientific philosophy of history. Thanks to this, with the advancement
of industrialisation, (electorally) strong Socialist trade unions and
political parties emerged in Europe. After the <u>1900’s</u>, their
revolutionary purposes were gradually marginalised in favour of
reformist claims for a gradual improvement in the framework of
capitalist society.

<br>

## The Feminist movement and Women’s Rights before
World War One

Although Women’s suffrage in several countries was only reached in the
<u>1890’s</u> and the <u>1920’s</u>, the Feminist movement started long
before:

Mary Astell (<u>A Serious Proposal to the Ladies + Some Reflections upon
Marriage</u>) = “If all Men are born free, how is it that all Women are
born Slaves?”

Olympe de Gouges (<u>Declaration of the Rights of Women and the Female
Citizen</u>) = exposed the failures of the French Revolution in the
recognition of sexual equality; afterwards, in the 1790, Nicolas de
Condorcet and Etta Palm d’Aelders unsuccessfully called on the National
Assembly to extend civil and political rights to women

Mary Wollstonecraft <u>(A Vindication of the Rights of Women</u>) = one
of the earliest works of feminist philosophy, claims women’s right for
education in order for them to take their role in society, as they are
essential to the nation

Clara Zetkin = Marxist theorist and activist for women’s rights;
organised the first International Women’s Day

Harriet Taylor Mill (<u>the Enfranchisement of Women</u>)


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 10: The concept of ‘nation’ and Nationalism

Learning objectives:

1. The ideas of Nation: Essentialism vs Constructivism
2. The phases of Nation-Building
3. The Nation as an Imagined Community
4. Pedagogy and the invention of tradition

<br>

## The ideas of Nation: Essentialism vs Constructivism

Reilly writes:

> The national idea — that the world is divided into separate people each
with its own distinct culture and deserving political independence — is
sometimes regarded as a natural and ancient organization of human
society.

This has been the mainstream view of ‘nation’ all throughout the <u>19<sup>th</sup>
century</u> and most part of <u>20<sup>th</sup> century</u>, and in most the cases
it is the most widespread interpretation of national history and the
concept of being a nation.

According to these idea, the idea of a nation had always been present
yet invisible in the form of institutions of religion, feudalism, and of
dynasties that had hidden it for centuries in order to achieve national
unity before national consciousness could begin to spread. To become
conscious of the existence of nations is the first step to reach rebirth
and reemergence, or, in Italian, ‘risorgimento’. History that
reestablishes the idea of nation is also called <u>Essentialism</u>.
Federico Chabod was an Italian historian, and it was in his book, ‘The
Idea of a Nation' (<u>1961</u>) that he makes several references to
Rousseau, who underlined that at the centre of political society there
are wilful acts. This is called <u>Constructivism</u>, and it claims
that <u>a political community will not come into existence without
wilful acts that come from a place of determination, since a nation must
be constructed with a wilful act as the number of communities that would
come into existence on that territory is not decided beforehand</u> — a
second thought that not many scholars necessarily share. In fact, there
were many intellectual confrontations between these two schools of
scholars.

From the <u>1980s</u> onwards, the Constructivist interpretation of
nations was put forward by scholars who didn’t have a <u>patriotic
interpretations</u> of nations; they were more critical regarding the
very idea of the nation, which did not necessarily stick with the
distinction between nationalism and patriotism. They referred more to
the Constructivist Understanding and <u>looked back again at the history
of the nation and national movements through this lens of constructivist
principles</u>.

Nevertheless, they looked also back an important text from <u>1882</u>
written by the French historian Ernest Renan called “Qu’est-ce qu’une
Nation?”/“What is a nation?”. We must remember the context of this text,
however: in <u>1882</u>, France was still healing from the trauma of
being defeated by Prussia. France was deep in thought regarding the very
concept of nation; Ernest Renan certainly had a constructivist
interpretation and was by no means critical or distant from the notion
of nation. On the contrary: <u>he tried to discover the will behind the
nation and also tried to persuade the French to wilfully support
this</u> (Constructivism was a great way to enforce patriotism).

According to Renan, a nation is nothing that is objectively given, but:

1.  A geographical entity that, as a rule, evolved from the
    transformation of pre-existing dynastic states

2.  A spiritual entity (principle/inheritance-based on collective memory
    and a sense of belonging)

3.  A coherent historical narrative based on facts selected to make them
    converge, such as representing the nation as a necessary, logical,
    coherent organism

With regard to the last point, the Essentialist position, according to
Renan, is the outcome of a coherent historical narrative. Politically,
he believed that this narrative must be enforced by historians, but he
also claimed that <u>it is not a natural outcome of history, just a
construction</u>.

<br>

## The phases of Nation-Building

In the <u>1960’s/1970’s</u>, a popular approach to the problem of
nation-building was the one proposed by Ernest Gellner with his “Nations
and Nationalism” of <u>1983</u> (Gellner could well be placed between
Essentialism and Constructivism).

In light of the social sciences of his time, he figured out a model that
perfectly delineates the separate steps of nation-building and that can
be applied to every single nation:

<u>Statue ex Ante</u> (the French Revolution)

<u>National Irredentism/movements</u>

<u>Emergence of the Nation-State</u>

<u>Phase of Extreme Nationalism</u> (late 19<sup>th</sup> century; caused WWII)

<u>Phase of Cultural Convergence</u> (emergence of solidarity and
constitutional patriotism; eschatological process which didn’t foresee
the revival of nationalism from the 1990’s to today)

Miroslav Hroch (a Czech historian) wrote an important book called
“Social preconditions of national revival in Europe” (<u>1985</u>). He
studied smaller nations (‘nations without history’); his view also lies
between Essentialism, Constructivism and Marxism, focusing on social
conditions. He listed three key moments within nation-building:

Memory of a common past

Social communication across linguistic and cultural borders thanks to
means of communication

Spread of the idea of equality

In conclusion, the most useful model to consider is the three-stage
model:

<u>PHASE A:</u> individual intellectuals are committed to establishing
the idea of a national identity

<u>PHASE B:</u> political activism for the “resurgence” of the nation

<u>PHASE C:</u> the national movement becomes a mass movement and morphs
to include the majority of the population

<br>

## The Nation as an Imagined Community

Benedict Anderson was an anthropologist who became exceptionally
influential in the <u>1980’s/1990’s</u>. He was a key witness of the
political events in Indonesia, and, stricken by what he had seen, wrote
his “Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism” (<u>1983</u>).

In this text, we can clearly underscore his Constructivist position, as
he spends a great part of the book analysing the phenomenon of
nation-building and the notion of nationalism in anthropological terms:

<u>A nation is a real community —&gt;</u> members imagine themselves in
relation with one another beyond the political and social contrasts

<u>A nation is both imagined and imaginary —&gt;</u> no single person
belonging to it in their lives will know all the others belonging to the
same nation

<u>Communities should not be distinguished according to objective
criteria —&gt;</u> they should only be distinguished in the way in which
they imagined themselves

<br>

## Pedagogy and the invention of tradition

Eric J. Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger’s <cite>The Invention of Tradition</cite>
(<u>1983</u>) made various claims regarding the concept of nation:

National identity is based on the representation of the modern nation in
terms of an ancient, primordial phenomenon, notwithstanding that fact
that it is, in fact, a new historical phenomenon

To represent the nation as something that must just be 'rediscovered' or
‘resurrected’ is pulling forth alleged ‘traditions’ that did not
previously exist and were merely invented

To be taken over by the 'masses' from the élites who invented them;
these traditions are disseminated first by the means of culture (poems,
novels, works, dictionaries, newspapers etc.), then through political
propaganda

Once the nation-state is founded, the education of the masses continues
through the press, books, the cult of national heroes, school education,
military service, public rites and a rewriting of the landscape
(monuments, interventions urban, place names, street names, parks,
unification of signs etc.)

Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi is considered the founding father of European
pedagogy. He elaborated a very interesting method that foresaw so-called
“developmental pedagogy”, AKA, <u>the method with which to entrench the
idea of belonging to a place/a nation in the mind of an infant</u>.

Anne-Marie Thiesse, on the other hand, narrated about the time the
invention of tradition and folklore occurred (around the second part of
the <u>18<sup>th</sup> century</u>). This involved the <u>conceptualisation and the
realisation of the first examples of peoples’ sovereignty, politically
legitimised thanks to folklore</u>.

Lastly, George L. Mosse in his <cite>The Nationalisation of the Masses</cite> illustrated how the Nazi movement had come to power in <u>1933</u>, noting that a cultural precondition that had already existed before had made sure that the party would have imminent success.

<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 11: Social changes in Europe, 1800-1914

Learning objectives:

1. An Overview of Social Changes up until World War One
1. Transformations of Bourgeoisie and the ‘Liberal Idea’
1. Transformation of the working class and the ‘socialist idea’
1. The ‘residual’ sectors of society: the Nobility and Peasants

<br>

## An Overview of Social Changes up until World War One

The 19<sup>th</sup> century was characterized by <u>changes in class structure and
in their names</u>. With a rise in productivity from the times of the
neolithic revolution, it was possible to construct a triangular social
hierarchy in which there were <u>less rich people than people in the
working class</u>:

1. Highest orders
2. Second class
3. Third class
4. Fourth class
5. Fifth class
6. Sixth class
7. Seventh class
8. Army and navy

This new hierarchy divided people according to <u>their role within the
productive system</u>. Marx’s division of classes, considered by many
thinkers of the 19<sup>th</sup> century, was the following:

Capitalists, or bourgeoisie (own the means of production and purchase
the labor power of other workers)

Workers/Proletariat (do not own means of production and sell their own
labor power)

Petite Bourgeoisie/“Middling” class (own means of production but does
not purchase labor power)

In the first group, we have the model industrial great bourgeoisie on
the left, and on the right, we have the Junger, lower-class men which
still had a huge influence on the State, the military and particularly
on land owners east Germany .  
The next is what is known as the bourgeoisie, a group of people with
varied professions who are on the same level as the agriculture
entrepreneurs that possess the land and a certain amount of wealth.

Next we have the petit bourgeoisie, who are the equivalent of the old
society are small and middle-class agricultural land owners.  
And finally we have the rest, and what in British classification of
early <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u> are called work mechanics and paupers are here
put together at the end of <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u> in a category called the
proletariat which also has a traditional part: the workers and men of
agriculture.

In short, the division of classes was oriented according to the position
of the individual in the production process, and according to Marx and
other 19<sup>th</sup>-century thinkers, there were three groups of people in this
hierarchy:

1. The first were the capitalists, or bourgeoise, a term which
indicates the owners of the means of production who purchase the labor
of others to run the production process and take profit from it
2. The second group consists of the workers, or the proletariat, who do
not own means of production and are forced to sell their own labor power
in order to live
3. Then there is the middling class, also called the Petite bourgeoise,
which own the means of production, but there are very few of them; the
land they own is far too small to enable them to purchase the work of
others, so they just work in a family enterprise on their own without
exploiting the work of the others.

In the general projection by Marx and others it was foreseen that this
petit bourgeoisie and middle classes would disappear and the whole
society would polarise; small groups of owners of means of production in
greater areas and an increasing group of workers meant that the latter
were not owners of production and were obliged to sell their work to the
aforementioned  
With this in mind, a political background emerges: all workers operate
under the same conditions and are all deprived of means of production,
and thus they have to sell their workforce and this puts them into
condition that is objectively opposed in the interest of those that own
the means of production. At the time, however, not everyone was
conscious of this fact: on one hand, there were classes defined by
objective conditions, and on the other, there was a lack of awareness
regarding consciousness of the class condition.

So what is a class for itself for its members?  
According to socialist Thompson’s essay, in order to know how the
working class saw itself or how it was seen by the rest of society, we
must also look at how the members of that class fought to become one. In
the years between <u>1780</u> and <u>1832</u>, most English
working-class people came to feel an sense of identity and a certain
animosity towards men of other classes whose interests are different
from (and usually opposed to) theirs. Thompson focuses much on what
early thinkers called class consciousness and how they shaped what we
can call the English working class. Although Karl Marx himself did not
[articulate](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/articulate) a theory of class [consciousness](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/consciousness),
he intimated the concept in his characterization of the working class.
According to Marx, workers first become conscious of sharing common
grievances against capitalists (thus forming a class “in itself”) and eventually develop an awareness of
themselves as forming a social class opposed to the bourgeoisie (thus
becoming a class “for itself”), the proletariat.
Class consciousness is a historical phenomenon, born out of [collective](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/collective) struggle. In this sense, Marx did not approach class consciousness as a matter of pure ideality. Rejecting any separation of theory and practice, he used the term “conscious human practices” to emphasise the conjunction of subjectivity and objectivity in history. At the end, according to Heywood’s post-linguistic approach
to reveal the history of the working class, <u>the bourgeoise identified themselves as the embodiment of a new liberal ideology, the working class as the embodiment of the socialist ideology and the other classes as the conservative</u>.

<br>

## Transformations of Bourgeoisie and the ‘Liberal Idea’

In Petri’s view, the most interesting part of Heywood’s analysis is that
of the <u>transformations of the bourgeoisie</u> and the ‘liberal
utopia’; he starts with describing the bourgeoisie condition as
reflected by this liberal utopia. The latter expected that society would
develop increasingly towards a context of <u>free producers who need an
exchange of goods on the free market in an optimal allocation of the
overall resources of society</u>. At the same time, they would confine
the State’s function to the ‘night guard functions’ of securing the rule
of the law, the security of property rights and of public security, but
otherwise abstain from the organization of their lives because that
would be self-organised by civil society through the so-called public
sphere of organization, debate, and exchange of opinions, and there was
a growing number of <u>associations for leisure time</u> or literally
any purpose which testified the growing tendency of social
self-organization of the public sphere (typical of the ideals and the
reality of this early bourgeoisie development). Another ‘sacred cow’ of
the liberal utopia was the sharp distinction between the private sphere
(exclusively home to the individual) and the public sphere. Symbol of
this distinction was the role assigned to women, who now were more or
less relegated to the private sphere; they might have acquired a role of
command within the household, but they were excluded in this liberal
utopia’s public sphere.

Heywood then chooses to analyse the second half of the <u>19<sup>th</sup>
century</u> and looks at how these expectations were or were not met,
how these expectations of a liberal utopia then proved to be inadequate
with regards to the various changes in society and what discrepancies
this produced in other ideologies. First of all, contrary to the
expectations of the first half of the 19<sup>th</sup> century, <u>there was no
conversion of society towards the middling strata of producers</u>, but,
on the contrary, it became evident that there was a <u>growing sense of
social polarisation</u>. In the broad landscape of enterprises, it
became clear that there was a concentration process in the making that
<u>hampered free competition</u> thanks to an oligopolistic and
monopolistic market structure (born with the creation of trusts and
cartels). Important producers of raw materials and commodities (such as
coal and steel) would agree on a price for the market which all the
buyers and consumers were obliged to pay; this was the complete opposite
of a free market.

The next phenomenon we should look at is <u>how the class consciousness
of the bourgeoisie changed</u>. Many of these ‘new rich’ people (who
became such through the development of their industrial enterprises)
developed aristocratic ideas and social models where this was possible;
they applied to become nobles through various contrasts because they saw
this as a matter of social prestige. The economically most successful
representatives of the bourgeoisie did not personify the liberal utopia,
but tended towards other social models in their own self-reflection
regarding themselves. On the other end of the bourgeoisie spectrum,
burrowed deep within the oligopolistic shape of the market, chock-full
with trusts, big banks and cartels, we can find the economic existence
of small shopkeepers who could not easily compete with the competition
of the industries and producers, so they developed a sort of
<u>animosity towards these upper-bourgeoisie classes</u> (whom they
suspected to be a conspiring group of jews) and hoped that the
regulating hand of the State would intervene (due to this, they
developed <u>State-oriented, nationalist and corporatist
sympathies</u>). New forms of menagerie capitalism within enterprises
gave birth to new types of bourgeoisie people and professions such as
employers, engineers, managers of firms, etc., who were not quite
characterized by markets, but by hierarchies, and formed sort of ‘small
States’ with both bureaucratic and military organizations.

Lastly, thanks to these market and industrial developments, a skilled
workforce was formed through public schooling and increased the number
of bourgeoisie professions that directly depended on the State as well
as their expectations (which depended on political dynamics and
expectations of the State to protect their interests). It is in this way
that <u>the liberal idyll collapsed</u>.

<br>

## Transformation of the working class and the ‘socialist idea’

Heywood, in this next section, replicates the same epidemiological
scheme and speaks of the first worker’s movement in the first half of
the <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u> (which Marx would then call Utopian Socialism)
organised in correlation with the Petit Bourgeoisie, a republican and
democratic wing organised in cooperative movements that preached
<u>political participation and justice</u>. Some utopian thinkers
include Owen, Fourier and Weitling, and their organizations were very
often religious and regarded subjects such as <u>healthcare and
political justice</u>; there were also statist socialist experiments in
the <u>1848 Revolution</u> in France (where this socialist view had its
roots in Saint-Simon’s works), which concluded with the term ‘social
rights’ being included in the country’s Constitution, and this certainly
transcended the bourgeois horizon of <u>political and social
organization</u>, guaranteeing the absence of unemployment and poverty
(workhouses were also erected).

Heywood declares the Revolution of 1848 a ‘watershed moment’ that then
gave rise to new and unprecedented forms of working class-oriented
socialist organizations which became visible beyond the left-wing and
republican forces of bourgeois origin and became autonomous <u>with
their own socialist ideologies</u>; these then became particularly
influenced by Marxist theories and erected this theoretical edifice of
scientific socialism.

Then, in the <u>second half of the 19<sup>th</sup> century</u>, these merged with
<u>practical experience</u>, so that the programs of socialist parties
and trade unions could be seen as a product of both practical experience
and dialogue with theoretical elaboration (e.g.: reforms for democratic
participation of the working class operated on both grounds). Heywood
also pointed out, however, that the ‘real’ workers weren’t really
involved in this dialogue, as <u>the objective interests of the working
class were more important than the subjective self-consideration of
workers</u>; this was a qualitative difference that was both an element
of political strength and one of division between the individual and
local consciousness of the average worker, who would certainly fight for
higher wages and reforms, but nevertheless, would stay in an open field
of ideological competitions. For example, what was not fully reflected
in these theories was that <u>industrialisation brought about
hierarchisation in the working class</u>; the theory said that their
interests were common (they were all workers who needed to sell their
work force), but that meant little compared to the daily abuse and
exploitation of each singular worker during the production process. The
reality of the working class was not homogeneous, and everyone
experienced the system differently. On an ideological level, <u>the
working class</u> (especially when mass organizations and nationalists
came into power in the second half of the 19<sup>th</sup> century) <u>was not
impermeable</u>; proof of this was the First World War. Until then, the
political orientation of the socialist parties had been strongly
anti-war and internationalist, but many workers were still captured by
the enthusiasm of patriotic and national mobilisation when the war broke
out.

<br>

## The ‘residual’ sectors of society: the Nobility and Peasants

The last part of Heywood’s analysis is dedicated to Conservatism and the
upper strata, the so-called ‘high society’ that had been around since
the Ancien Règime and the feudal social order of earlier times. They
were made up of the <u>high clergy, the nobility and the
aristocrats</u>, who conserved a major role in society and politics
(e.g.: in the constitutional model of Great Britain), but were also
great land owners in many European countries (all for constitutional
reasons; the nobility has a permanent role in the state apparatus,
especially in the Tsarist Empire, the Habsburg Empire and Germany). So
even in an industrial society they had kept their positions, and Heywood
interprets this as the ‘conservative protest’ against progress;
according to conservatives, industrialisation has also its negative
consequences (unfair competition on the market for small craftsmen and
little shopkeepers). This paternalistic old model favoured both the
nobility and the poor, who were open to conservative ideas, fearing a
competitive market.


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 12: World timeline, 1750-1914; Western Domination

Learning objectives:

1. Napoleon in Egypt
2. Technological innovations and transport systems
3. Imperialism and the Industrial Age
4. Western Expansion in Asia

<br>

## Napoleon in Egypt

The first example of European expansionism in the late <u>18<sup>th</sup>/19<sup>th</sup>
century</u> was Napoleon Bonaparte’s expedition in Egypt; symbolically,
it represented a number of different elements that were behind the
reason for this project.

On July 1<sup>st</sup>, <u>1798</u>, Napoleon landed in Egypt with 400 ships,
54,000 men (including 150 scientists, engineers and scholars whose
responsibility was to learn about Egyptian culture and the history of
the territory). Upon arrival, the French installed a large library and
several librarians who looked after the books, who brought them to
prospective readers; the French particularly enjoyed it when a Muslim
visitor appeared to be interested in the sciences, and they welcomed
them immediately and showed them all of the literary works that were at
hand. The appreciation of the French troops’ arrival can be seen in the
writings of Abd al-Rahman al-Jabarti, an Egyptian intellectual. However,
while Jabarti spoke of the arrival of the French in Egypt (particularly
in Cairo) in a positive light, their presence soon brought about the
destruction of any barricades they encountered, the Mosque of al-Azhar
and millions of Qurans. All the colonisers had for Egyptian (and Muslim)
culture was disgust and disdain. We can also cite sources from Egyptian
Christians (copts) who experienced the arrival of the French in the same
way as Muslims (such as Jabarti) did. French sources are also
indispensable in describing the colonisation of Egypt, as even they
referred to the conquering methods used as ‘massacres’.

The French Republic, under Napoleon, had two strategic goals in the
Mediterranean: to <u>control it</u> and to <u>create a French corridor
to the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean</u> in order to create a
disadvantage for the Ottoman Empire and Great Britain. In diplomatic
terms, this meant the betrayal of the alliance between France and the
Ottoman Empire that can be traced back to the <u>16<sup>th</sup> century</u>. Since
he was aware of this, Napoleon tried to present his expedition to the
Egyptians as something that was done in the name of the Sultan against
the Mamluks (who desired independence), hoping that the Sultan wouldn’t
consider his strategy as treason (and would ally himself with Russia and
other traditional adversaries) and that Egypt wouldn’t greet his men
with initial hostility.

Napoleon’s expansionistic, economic and imperialistic ambitions are
easily reducible to certain motives, but, as we say today, “the West
does not go to war only for oil”. The West presented itself to other
nations as <u>a beacon of freedom, humanity and civilization that
operates on a sincere self-referential belief that had both a
philosophical and a theological background</u>: on the one hand, it
built on some anti-Catholic traditions that dated back years, and on the
other, the anti-trinitarian visions of the Enlightenment and the Supreme
Being (voted by the National Assembly) make the assertion that the
French were the best Muslims in the mind of those who pronounced it to
be so.

But the Mediterranean unity dreamt by the French elite transcended the
present thanks to the tailors of history; this was the fruit of European
semantic construction that lasted two or three centuries and that
assigned the Mediterranean an exemplary role (with a special place for
Egypt). On the eve of the battle against the Mamluks, this idea had
matured long since, so it was easy to see how a French victory would be
able to breach the past and the future. It is thanks to this ideology
that Napoleon motivated his troops: they were each puzzle-pieces in
history, and the result of their efforts would mark humanity for
centuries to come. This secular vision of history will always be an
ideological drive behind European expansionism.

<br>

## Technological innovations and transport systems

Behind Western expansion was also a whirlwind of technological
innovations and transport systems (both brought around by the Industrial
Revolution) that allowed expeditions to travel far and wide:

1.  Military means (breech-loading rifles, machine guns)
1.  Circulation of people and goods (lowering of transport coast, transoceanic steamship routes)
2.  Steam ships, building of channels (Suez built by the french and Panama in the 20<sup>th</sup> century) and the transatlantic telegraph

<br>

## Imperialism and the Industrial Age

Western expansion continued in the same pattern as <u>16<sup>th</sup>-century</u>
European Imperialism and <u>15<sup>th</sup>-century</u> European Colonialism; but
this new phase of Western expansion differed in many ways from the
earlier one. Now the primary focus was on Africa, the Middle East, Asia
and Pacific societies rather than on the Americas, and the main
‘players’ were no longer Spain or Portugal, but rather Great Britain,
France, Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, Russia and the United
States.

We can summarise the motives behind this expansion as:

1.  ECONOMIC MOTIVES

    Export of industrial surplus production

    Export of capital and profitable investment

    Raw materials

    Internal social ‘pacification’

<!-- -->

1.  GEOPOLITICAL MOTIVES

\- Competing nationalisms

1.  IDEOLOGICAL MOTIVES

    Export of a higher form of humanism

    Dissemination of Christianity

    Export of technical progress

    Export of economic wealth

    Education

<br>

## Western Expansion in Asia

Colonial expansion in the <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u> can be described as
Western, and not just as European, because the United States took a big
part in it as well. The nation had already had colonial ambitions in the
early <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u> in Africa, creating the colony of Liberia (a
name which was given because it was a land that was believed to host
emancipated African-American slaves who were sent back to their
homeland) and expanding in the Pacific towards Hawaii and other islands,
landing the Black Ships on the coast of Japan in <u>1854</u> and forcing
the nation to open its borders to Western trade. This triggered many
changes in Japan, like the end of Shogun-rule (<u>1867</u>) and the
beginning of the Meiji-Restoration as well as Japanese
industrialisation.

In Asia, anti-colonial movements were quick to surge (especially in
India and in the Philippines) in the <u>mid-19<sup>th</sup> century</u>; the
Philippines succeeded in temporarily freeing itself of colonial rule
with its Declaration of Independence in <u>1898</u>, but the island were
ceded to the United States by Spain.

A great transformation occurred concurrently In Indonesia, where the
trade ports on the spice islands, which had been controlled by the Dutch
since the <u>17<sup>th</sup> century</u>, were swept aside; the Netherlands had
proclaimed Indonesia to not only be a mere colony, but a nationalised
colony known as the Dutch East Indies.

Similarly, in India the East India Company had immense control of the
territory, but had to face rebellion in the <u>mid-19<sup>th</sup> century</u>. By
<u>1858</u>, Great Britain had eradicated the Company and transformed
the country into a colonial government (AKA, a colony).

Finally we have China, a populous Empire where Western forces tried to
interfere in various ways, such as the British, who took the first
opportunity to influence the country’s population in the first Opium
War. Great Britain wanted to force the country into accepting copious
flows of opium in the name of free trade, which created worrying social
dilemmas in China. The First Opium War (<u>1839-1842</u>) ended with the
Nanking agreement, which was in favour of the UK. This led to the spark
of the Second Opium War (<u>1856-1860</u>), in which the anti-foreign
Boxer Uprising (the Yihetuan movement) was a key factor. The Opium issue
came to an end at the end of the Qing Dynasty in <u>1911</u>.


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 13: Global Changes; Colonialism and Imperialism

Learning objectives:

1. British takeover of India
1. The British-Chinese Wars of 1835-41 and 1856-60
3. Scramble for Africa, 1875-1924
4. American Expansion
5. Russian Expansion

<br>

## British takeover of India

In India, the power of the Mughal Empire waned in the <u>18<sup>th</sup>
century</u> due to political tensions between the Muslim Emperor and his
Hindu subjects, as well as the sparks of violence generated by regional
rivalries. Some wealthy Indian traders, resenting the demands of Mughal
authorities, helped finance the military forces of the British East
India Company, and a remarkable number of Indian men joined European-led
armies, attracted by the security and opportunity for enrichment they
offered. So the power of the East India Company grew large enough in the
territory to marginalise other European competitors, and this Company
took control of the subcontinent until the <u>mid-19<sup>th</sup> century</u>.

The Indian Rebellion of <u>1857/8</u> began with a <u>cultural clash</u>
in the military when Indian troops refused to use cartridges greased
with animal fat; the Hindus feared that the fat came from holy cows,
while the Muslims feared it came from filthy pigs, so this led to a
rebellion that spread to all regions of Northern and Central India and
became a generalised uprising against British-style reform and Company;
a cruel and violent repression of the mutiny followed, and this period
ended with the <u>dissolution of the East India Company</u>. The
administration was taken over directly by the British government, which
proclaimed the Unitary State of India, which was then transformed into
vice-royal territory (a colony). At the same time, Great Britain
introduced a British-style parliamentary system, an element that would
later favour them in the organization of political movements for Indian
independence (these led to the formation of the Indian National Congress
and similar organizations in <u>1885</u>).

<br>

## The British-Chinese Wars of 1835-41 and 1856-60

The members of the British East India Company had long been frustrated
for years at their inability to find any Western products that could
interest China. The solution was found in India: opium. It had been
grown since ancient time for medical purposes; the Company increased its
production, and with the help of corrupt Chinese officials, imported
huge quantities into China, where the highly addictive drug found a
ready market. This was illegal from every point of view (social,
economic, etc.), and after years of discussion, the Imperial government
decided to crack down on the smugglers and British traders that were
caught in the act.

Chinese authorities destroyed large quantities of drugs, and Great
Britain took this as an opportunity to wage war on China with the
purpose of controlling its external sea trade by attacking coastal
cities and ports. After Great Britain’s victory, it forced China into an
agreement that decreed the creation of coastal colonies and the right of
British traders to operate under extraterritorial conditions (not
subject to Chinese jurisdiction). It was the later foreign prime
minister and first president of the British liberal party Henry John
Palmerston, who was one of the most important politicians in the <u>19<sup>th</sup>
century</u>, that made the following comment regarding the British
victory over China:

“There is no doubt that this event, which will form an epoch in the
progress of the civilization of the human races, must be attended with
the most important advantages of the commercial interests of England.”

<u>It is here that we see for the first time that drugs</u> (regarded in
the same manner as oil and armaments), the third most important
commodity within trade, <u>enter the stage of geopolitics as an
instrument of Western power</u>.

In China, the Nanking agreement and everything it implied facilitated
the birth of social tensions which articulated themselves more openly in
the form of protests and uprisings, causing the beginning of a period of
political and societal upheaval that culminated in humiliation and the
Second Opium War (which ended with the Siege of Beijing by the British
and a wide range of European powers). All this ended in <u>1911</u> with
the breakdown of the Chinese empire and the end of the Qing Dynasty.

<br>

## Scramble for Africa, 1875-1924

Since the colonial period had begun in the <u>15<sup>th</sup> century</u>, European
interest in Africa had mainly been limited to trade posts, but for a
number of reasons, there had never been an interest of conquering the
territory (except for the South African area, where Cape Town was
devising a settler-colonial project that was extending towards the
North).

In <u>1870</u>, only 10% of Africa was under European control, but by
<u>1914</u>, it had increased to 90% of the continent thanks to the
increased need for raw materials brought around by the Industrial
Revolution; only Ethiopia (Abyssinia) was still independent, as newfound
African colonies had become the main source of raw materials for the
European economic and industrial elites.

To avoid a war among European powers, the Berlin Conference of
<u>1884</u> decided to regulate European colonisation and trade in
Africa (without African citizens themselves having any say in the
matter) and was the starting point of the Conquest of Africa. There were
almost no military conflicts between European colonising powers in this
period, and the military conquest of Africa had began in a low-cost and
systematic manner.

Of course, this all put the Africans at a disadvantage, who didn’t have
the technological means to effectively oppose the colonisers’ military
conquest; small military units of European powers could control large
areas of African land.

<br>

## American Expansion

“American history has been in a large degree the history of the
colonisation of the Great West. The peculiarity of American institutions
is the fact that they have been compelled to adapt themselves to the
changes of an expanding people.”

\- Frederich J. Turner

The effort of pushing American progress beyond their frontiers had
developed Southward and Westward, as the doctrine of President James
Monroe claimed that the States were the supervisors of Latin America and
territories that spread Eastward. In <u>1822</u>, the American
Colonisation Society created Liberia in Africa. Ironically, these
efforts were sold under the trademark of anti-colonialism, particularly
in the Caribbean, with which the States had traditionally very tight
connections. In Cuba, the citizens fought several wars to free
themselves from Spanish colonial control (<u>1868, 1879-1880,
1895-1898</u>); at the end of the last war (<u>1895-1898</u>), the
Cubans were on the brink of winning independence, but the USA intervened
and its Newspapers ran wild headlines like “Spanish Cannibalism”,
“Inhuman torture” and “Amazon Warriors Fight for Rebels” that radically
<u>dehumanised the Spaniards</u>. The Americans came to the help of the
anti-colonial rebels, sending the USS Maine warship to Havana Bay on
<u>February 15<sup>th</sup> of 1898</u>; a huge explosion of unknown origin wrecked
the ship and killed 266 American sailors. This was an excuse to declare
war on Spain and enter the war under an anti-colonial pretext (when in
reality, the USA only wanted to occupy Cuba and other Spanish colonies).
In <u>1902</u>, Cuba obtained a form of independence whose conditions
privileged American presence in Cuba (these regulations were only
removed under the presidency of Roosevelt, when Cuba became a de facto
American protectorate).

However, American progress decided that the West was its preferred
frontier, so it spread to California and the Pacific Ocean, conquering
Hawaii, opening Japan to the benefits of Western trade and looking for
other Spanish colonies; it found the Philippines. Here, all throughout
the late <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u>, several rebellions against the Spanish
monarchy developed in <u>1896</u> under the oppositions’ leader, Emilio
Aguinaldo. The Filipino movement would then proclaim independence on
<u>June 12th, 1898</u>, but soon a contrast was born between the
American troops and Filipinos, who then engaged in the prosecution of a
war of Independence against occupying American forces. This second war
lasted until <u>1902</u> and ended with American victory, resulting in
the death of over 4,200 Americans and over 20,000 Filipino combatants
and 20,000 Filipino civilians (who died due to violence, famine and
disease).

The anti-colonial endeavour against the Spaniards gave America the
opportunity to conquer strategical important areas, such as Puerto Rico
and Panama (where the channel would control Atlantic and Pacific trade).
Expansion into the Pacific brought Hawaii under American control, as
well as Guam and the Philippines (strategically positioned close to
China, Japan and the strait of Malaga).

<br>

## Russian Expansion

The Tsarist Empire had been expanding towards Siberia since the <u>17<sup>th</sup>
century</u> and continued ‘till the <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u>, spreading
eastward towards Japan and China and southward towards South Asia (which
created many conflicts with the British Empire, which had the opposite
ambition in Asia).

However, in East Asia a previously unheard-of adversary emerged: Japan.
This nation exhibited increasing military and economic strength, and the
Russian-Japanese war (<u>1904-1905</u>) broke out over rival imperial
ambitions in Manchuria and Korea. The Russian defeat was a major blow to
the Tsarist regime and its expansionistic ambitions; nevertheless,
looking at the development of Russia towards the east, we can see many
parallels with American expansion towards the West (<u>regarding
overcoming frontiers, bringing civilization and progress and
enlightening ‘the natives’</u>), but there were also many differences,
namely that Russia had the traditional approach of an Empire towards
conquest (like Great Britain) and tried to integrate these populations
in order to create a multicultural and multi-religious Empire.


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 14: Global Changes; the effects of Colonialism and Imperialism

Learning objectives:

1. The effects of Colonial Imperialism in India
2. The effects of Colonial Imperialism in Africa
3. Migration and racism
4. The effects of Western influence on China
5. The effects of Western influence on Japan</u>

<br>

## The effects of Colonial Imperialism in India

In India, Great Britain introduced institutions such as railroads, new
schools, new streets and parliamentarianism; these were benefits that
certainly would leave a mark on Indian society for years to come and
would unite its people also by creating alternative means of
communication (lingua franca, etc.).

If we look at the development of India’s share in world manufacturing,
it was at 25.0% in <u>1750</u>, and had shot up to 1.4% by <u>1913</u>;
we can say that it was raised thanks the huge dimension of the Indian
population. However, the production of cotton textiles was greatly
reduced; initially, Great Britain had introduced protectionist laws
during the Industrial Revolution to prohibit the import of cotton into
the UK, and over time, it became a matter of technological advantage. At
the end, Indian goods could no longer compete with English goods, not
even on the English market, thus creating a sort of dependency on
England, the ‘mother country’.

This ‘mother’ was not always so generous and well-meaning. During the
second half of the <u>1870s</u>, there was a great famine in India, six
to ten million people died of hunger. The food prices soared, so flour
was expensive, and the Indian population asked for a regulation of food
prices. This proposal was instantly rejected by the Famine Commission
and by the British parliament because the laws of ‘lesser fair’ were
sacred as were those of ‘free trade’; in addition, the British
government believed that famine was a ‘righteous punishment’ for India’s
‘overbreeding’.

<br>

## The effects of Colonial Imperialism in Africa

Unfortunately, hunger crises were a normal occurrence in agricultural
societies; the last major hunger crisis in Europe was caused by a series
of bad harvest in <u>1846/7</u>. Hunger crises happened cyclically in
densely populated areas where there was no availability of uncultivated
land to expand the usable area during times of great difficulty, and in
Africa, there were certainly many hunger crises. Nevertheless, these
cyclical crises had everything to do with the structural dependency that
became the colonial footprint in the continent. The consequences of
these disruptions were so strong that Africa became a symbol for of
poverty and a need for ‘Western help’, reinforcing racist and
supremacist views typical of these colonial elites.

These structural disruptions cut deep into the heart of African society.
When the colonial system expanded in the area, forced labour was used
for infrastructure by all colonial powers, and the worst exploitation of
all occurred in the Congo Free State, which was privately owned by
Leopold the First (King of Belgium), famous for his exceptional
brutality.

The change of the agricultural structure and the crops that were
cultivated was important; the land dedicated to the cultivation of
industrial foodstuff that were thought for the world market and served
industrial societies radically changed the continent. There was less
land for the African population to grow crops that they needed to keep
themselves alive and well, leading to numerous hunger crises and to
their migration to poor urban areas and mines; often, the latter was
conditioned to the rule that young men couldn’t bring their families
with them (especially in South Africa), so this also split families so
that the social structure of African society was shattered completely.

<br>

## Migration and racism

In the late <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u>, there were huge migration flows from
Europe to North or South America; if 15 million Europeans left from
Europe, at the same time, 38 million Chinese and Indians migrated for
the same reasons, mostly to Southeast Asia, where they built local
communities that would become ethnic networks on the long run; many
Indians also migrated to South Africa. African slavery had produced
European racism as a legitimisation of slavery because they were
‘beasts’ or inferior to the ‘white man’, and was a tool to soften the
moral threat that slavery posed. But when it was gradually abolished in
the <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u>, racism was reinforced by society to maintain
the subjugation of the African population. Now that slaves were free
men, racism soared higher than ever.

<br>

## The effects of Western influence on China

In the late <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u>, the Chinese Empire suffered defeat
against the West and Japan and was riddled by anti-foreign Boxer
uprisings and internal conflicts. This social and political unrest
brought about the end of the Qing dynasty and the institution of
imperial China in <u>1911</u>; just like with India, the development of
Chinese share in world manufacturing was at 33.0% in <u>1750</u>, and
this remarkable share was reduced to 3.6% in <u>1913</u>. How did this
happen?

The mechanisms were similar to what happened in India as far as the
general circumstances were concerned, such as the growing productivity
gap between Europe and China thanks to the Industrial Revolution; not
even in the later <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u> there was no significant
structural change in China, remaining a rural society. A sense of loss
pervaded Chinese society at the end of the Qing dynasty and a refusal of
Western influence, and this translated in a return to the desire of
reaffirming Confucian principles and in an opposition to the imitation
of Western techniques. The conservative forces prevailed in China, and
this, similarly to India, did not accelerate the industrial recovery of
China as one may have expected in the second half of the <u>19<sup>th</sup>
century</u>, whereas this was the case in Japan.

<br>

## The effects of Western influence on Japan

Japan was an Empire where the main executive power was not assumed by
the Emperor, but rather by the Shogun (the highest military leader),
whose authority was so strong that its office became hereditary. After
the first opening of Japan, however, dissatisfaction with the
Shogunate’s politics bloomed among some elites,
driven by nobles and the pro-Emperor Samurai. These elites were confused
as to how to react to Western influence: should they rebuke Western
culture completely, or apply certain reforms to industrialise the nation
and grow above Western powers? The Meiji reforms pertained to this party
(the alliance that was created by the young Emperor Meiji) and led to
the resignation of the Shogun and a civil war in which imperial forces
claimed victory and reinstated full imperial rule on the basis of a
Constitution like in Western countries; this was instrumental for these
reform objectives. Delegates of Japanese scholars were sent out to
Western countries to best understand their societies and ‘borrow’ the
principles and ideas that would help Japan; this led to a process of
modernization, industrialisation and other successful changes because
the cultural mindset and traditions of Japan were never erased, but they
were rather instrumental to reinforce Japan on their own terms. A
certain Japanese nationalism developed along with militaristic/imperial
ambitions that gave way to spectacular victories, the most important of
which were:

1.  The First Sino-Japanese War (1894-1895)

<!-- -->

1.  Victory in the Russo-Japanese War (1904-1905)

2.  Control of Taiwan, Korea and the southern half of Sakhalin


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 16: Theories of Imperialism

Learning objectives:

1. “Progress or Exploitation?” Debates on Western Imperialism
2. Hobson: Earth hunger and the scramble for export markers
3. Lenin: Structural features of the highest stages of capitalism
4. Amadori Virgilij: Craving for a world-wide moral empire

<br>

## “Progress or Exploitation?” Debates on Western Imperialism

It isn’t strange to ask ourselves what the reasons behind accelerated
European expansion actually were and what the factors were to make this
extension possible. If we are to answer this question, we should first
consider the economic factors.

It was thanks to industrialisation that Europe and the United States of
America quickly became the centre of manufacturing and economic growth.
But in order to industrialise, a country needs raw materials, something
which Europe was in dire need of after exhausting its reservoirs. So the
continent’s nations expanded imports from other colonies in order to
obtain raw materials such as dyes, cotton, vegetables, metal ores and
later petroleum from overseas. Regarding industrialisation, we can also
say that the invention of railroads assisted in transporting massive
amounts of goods to and from the colonies, and that the telegraph
greatly facilitated communication and the administrative control over
the colonies.

However, it is also crucial that we analyse the military factor. The
United States of America and Europe both continued to advance in
military technology, which was also a side effect of industrial and
technological development. Chemists created deadly explosives (and
later, poisonous gases) that could be used in war; an example of ones of
these chemists is Alfred Nobel, who invented Dynamite. With innovation
in production technology, industrial countries were also able to
manufacture imported firearms and greater amounts of munition. By the
<u>1880s</u>, the machine gun had become an effective battlefield
weapon, which gave European armies an advantage over their opponents
(like over the Zulu in Southern Africa during the Anglo-Zulu war in
<u>1879</u>).

<br>

## Hobson: Earth hunger and the scramble for export markers

In the <u>1900s</u>, John Hobson proposed the first comprehensive,
systematic and analytical study of imperialism, which was a phenomenon
he had witnessed for a number of years during the scramble for Africa or
the wars in the Philippines. He wondered what drove these
industrialised, wealthy countries to wage war against poorer,
‘third-world’ countries and to dominate them.

According to Hobson, the main drive behind this development was <u>the
concentration of wealth in the richer, industrialised nations of the
world</u>. Industrial development had created a small class of
industrialists and bankers who grew wealthier by the day; the number of
enterprises shrunk, and so production facilities adapted to this new
situation and produced a huge amount of consumer goods. Unfortunately,
there weren’t enough wealthy people to actively consume these goods.
This led to underconsumption (also known as overproduction), and thanks
to the phenomenon, rich bankers and industrialists could enjoy their new
wealth and selfishly keep the level of profits staggeringly high. The
State was now under the control of the interests of this wealthy
minority, which invested in rearmament and increasing the State’s power
through waging wars against poorer countries in order to conquer new
export markets.

Hobson was not a marxist revolutionary who would have insisted that
there be a rebellion to end this state of affairs; he was a left-wing
reformist liberal who was of the opinion that this wasn’t an inevitable
situation and could be overcome by reformist solutions, which could be
found through new State policies that were more worker-friendly. This
way, the State could contribute to increasing income levels of the
working classes and the poor, who constituted the majority of the
population at that time.

Thus, the State had basically two ways that it could evade this
situation:

1.  Abandon the legislation that had been unfriendly to trade union
    powers for decades

<!-- -->

1.  Introduce a minimum wage law

Another way would be progressive taxation, which is a tax reform that
would benefit the great majority of the population so that the rich
would pay much higher taxes and attenuate the tax level of the poor and
the working class. It would also be crucial to adopt welfare measures
(such as unemployment benefits) so as to increase the income level. With
a higher income level, the population would be able to reap the benefits
of these overproduced consumer goods and balance the economy.

<br>

## Lenin: Structural features of the highest stages of capitalism

Vlamidir Lenin was the leader of the Russian socialist majority wing and
wrote his most influential works regarding imperialism during World War
I when he was in exile in Switzerland. His analysis started out as
loosely based on Hobson’s work, and he wrote:

“The social liberal Hobson correctly takes into account two
‘historically concrete features of modern imperialism. First, the
competition between several imperialist nations, and secondly, the
predominance of the financier over the merchant.”

In the first point, Lenin says that Hobson was right in stating that the
competition between imperialist powers was inevitable and would lead to
war, as it had already done when Lenin was writing. The second point,
however, concerns the economic analysis behind the political process;
Lenin says that Hobson was also right in distinguishing the older form
of capitalism from a new phenomenon he calls financed capitalism, which
had been explained by Rudolf Hilferding (and shared by Lenin) within the
marxist theory; Imperialism is capitalism at that stage of development
at which the dominance of monopolies and finance capital is established;
in which the export of capital has acquired pronounced importance; in
which the division of the world among the international trusts has begun
and in which the division of all territories of the globe among the
biggest capitalist powers has been completed. Banks and industrial
cartels had merged into homogeneous groups of financed capitalism, just
as Hilferding had pointed out. But why is this an important point in the
explanation of imperialism?

Firstly, these monopolistic enterprises stemming from the merging of big
banks and industries take on a dimension that leads to the
<u>over-accumulation of capital</u>. This means that a certain level of
capital accumulation stays in the single bank or industrial enterprise
and within this monopolistic form as a whole, which makes it impossible
to remunerate the investment of a reasonable profit trade on the
domestic market. As a consequence, they have to export capital to
countries with less developed economies in order to regenerate the extra
profits that the whole market is not able to anymore. This is different
if compared with Hobson, who had concentrated on the production of goods
and the necessity to find export markets for these goods. Lenin argued
that the main interest in question is not the export of commodities, but
rather <u>to place direct investment in less developed countries</u>.

Secondly, Lenin writes:

“The prevailing types of enterprises were no longer those freely
competing inside the country and through contact between countries, but
within monopoly alliances of entrepreneurs and trusts.”

This new age of monopolistic capitalism makes the apparatus of financial
capitalism so powerful that it controls the State, its rule, its laws
and public spending on the domestic market, reinforcing once again the
oligopolistic position of big enterprises.

Lenin’s third point is that the State, as an expression of financial
capitalist interest, must also intervene abroad to safeguard the
monopolies’ possibilities of profit-making; this explains the aggressive
imperialist foreign policies and the military effort to establish direct
colonial control over Africa, Indo-China, etc.. It may be interesting to
see how Lenin describes the tendencies of what we today would call
globalization.

In his book published in <u>1902</u>, Hobson also remarked on the
endeavour of the well-meaning philanthropist, which we may consider the
equivalent to the relief and assistance organizations of our time. These
epically motivated reformists and missionaries devotedly followed the
world of even the most ferocious imperialists in order to do well in
their jobs. These philanthropists, according to Hobson:

“Believe in that religion and utilise it for their ends.”

According to Hobson, the ingeniousness of these people has become an
instrument that makes the apparatus of imperial power work smoothly.

<br>

## Amadori Virgilij: Craving for a world-wide moral empire

However, for the Italian sociologist Giovanni Amadori Virgilij (who
published “Il sentiments imperialista” four years after Hobson), the
craving for goodness is not just a fake pretext, but the very core of
imperialism:

“Along the general lineation of imperialist sentiment lies this
altruistic concept, which is one of the main factors of moral confidence
and faith in the destiny of this empire.”

At the core of imperialism lies the ideology and imperialist sentiment,
which is why one should criticise ‘the absolute inadequacy of all
definitions that explain the phenomenon as a result of political and
economic tendencies’. Entities are good intentions in itself, and that,
for Amadori, is the core problem of imperialism. The economic definition
of imperialism is not wrong, but it fails to explain that <u>it can
unfold only thanks to a belief system and a sentiment that are both
deeply entrenched in the psyche of popular mass sentiment</u>. According
to Amadori, imperialists believe to act in the name and interest of
civilization — that is, in the name of history. <u>Imperialism is a
general feeling of the people and the collective concept of
domination.</u>


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 17: World Timeline (1914-2003)

Learning objectives:

1. On the timeline: major events, 1914-2003
2. On the timeline: Independence of India, Indonesia and African countries, 1947-1989
3. On the timeline: the Vietnam war, 1965-1974
4. On the timeline: the Iranian Revolution of 1979

<br>

## On the timeline: major events, 1914-2003

<br>

## On the timeline: Independence of India, Indonesia and African countries, 1947-1989

## On the timeline: the Vietnam war, 1965-1974

<br>

## On the timeline: the Iranian Revolution of 1979

During World War II, Iran was assigned an important strategic role by
Churchill and Stalin, who were allies, and their Anglo-Iranian company
took great interest in the country. After the anglo-soviet agreements in
1941, Reza Shah was forced to abdicate in favour of Mohammed Reza
Pahlavi. After the war, soviet influence strengthened the position of
the communist party.


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 18: World War One

Learning objectives:

1. A gradual escalation of ‘regional’ conflicts among great powers
2. The ‘Entente’ and the ‘Central Powers’
3. Technology, mechanisation, industry, labour force mobilisation
4. A new global power rises, while empires break down</u>

<br>

## A gradual escalation of ‘regional’ conflicts among great powers

In <u>2014,</u> historian Christopher Black published ‘The Sleepwalkers’
about how Europe went to war in <u>1914</u>; according to the book, none
of the great powers actually wanted to end the war, and that, like
sleepwalkers, the European governments woke up in the reality of a
terrible war that no one had actually wanted. The fact is that, for
example, the Socialist International had predicted a clash between
imperialist powers as a structural necessity for capitalist development.
Liberal and conservative governments had plenty of opportunities to
confute this marxist ‘nonsense’, which, however, they didn’t do.

The World War had many roots: one was the breaking up of the alliance
between Russia and Austria during the Crimean War sixty years earlier.
This had translated into competition between these two nations in the
Balkans where they fought for dominance and often had conflicts of
interest, especially when an Austria-friendly king was substituted by a
Russia-friendly one.

Formal Austrian annexation of the Bosnian protectorate in <u>1908</u>
sharpened the tensions between Serbia and Austria; but this was just one
part of the story. Another was the series of social and political
mutinies in the Ottoman Empire, which led to the Young Turk Revolution
in <u>1908</u> and a break-away tendency in the Middle East. Great
powers in neighbouring countries observed the ‘ill man on the Bosphoros’
like vultures in the sky, hoping to take the part of the dying Empire’s
body that they desired.

In <u>1897</u>, Greece and Turkey fought over Crete. In <u>1911</u>,
Italy waged colonial wars against Libya, Greece and the Ottoman Empire.
The further weakening of the Ottoman Empire encouraged Serbia,
Montenegro, Bulgaria and Greece to go into battle in the First Balkan
War in <u>1912</u>, and the Ottoman Empire was expunged from many
European territories.

One year later, during the Second Balkan War (<u>1913</u>), Serbia and
Greece confronted Bulgaria, which wanted to annex Macedonia, and a year
later, Bulgaria would ally itself with Austria, Germany and the Turkish
arch enemy against Serbia in the occupation and violence against the
civilian population of which Bulgarian troops would become infamous for.

As we said before, Italy started its colonial adventure because, like
Germany, it felt that it deserved the colonial greatness that every
other nation possessed through the ‘humanitarian’ mission of civilizing
its colonies. In North Africa, Italian and French interests had clashed
lots of times; thousands of Italians had settled in Tunis, for example,
but France had conquered it.

The division of spheres of interests foresaw that Italy should look
after Tripoli and Cyrenaica, and once French ambitions were nearly
satisfied in Morocco, someone must have decided in Rome that it was high
time to take action before it was too late. Morocco had been a Sultanate
that had successfully stayed independent in the early modern period
(notwithstanding Spain and Portugal’s attacks), but at the beginning of
the <u>20<sup>th</sup> century</u>, France tried to upgrade its role as a colonial
world power. Going against the Maastricht convention of <u>1880</u>, it
decided to conquer Morocco, but France’s plan was foiled by Germany, who
was allied with the Moroccan Sultanate. In <u>1911</u>, France declared
direction of a Moroccan protectorate, and Germany opposed and sailed its
boats off the Moroccan coast. But then Berlin green lighted French
conquest of Morocco if it would cede a piece of French Congo and grant
free access to the Moroccan market. The typical Germany steadfastness
was reaffirmed in this way: business was business. The Moroccan
resistance was broken with great brutality.

The most important fault line, however, remains the <u>industrial rise
of Germany</u> and its rivalry with Britain. Germany built up a huge
modern navy with the openly declared purpose of challenging the maritime
superpower of the time, Great Britain, which took this boasting quite
seriously. The Reich had a strength also as a continental power, one
that Britain lacked in Europe; Britain felt the threat of Germany
building a Berlin-Baghdad railway to the Mesopotamian oil fields (which
it considered to be its very own private property), the British saw
little point in easing the tensions.

If these were ‘sleepwalkers’, then the phrase ‘a sleeper is not a
sinner’ must be revised: no one was innocent. In early 1914, the game
was ripe to turn into war at any moment.

The trigger, however, was Gavrilo Princip and the death of Archduke
Franz Ferdinand on <u>June 28<sup>th</sup>, 1914</u> in Sarajevo. It was the
perfect pretext. Still, it wouldn’t have been an adequate excuse had the
previous tensions not been apparent to Europe before, as the killing of
archdukes and important figures was quite widespread at the time: in
<u>1898</u>, Empress Elizabeth of Austria was shot, and so was, in
<u>1900</u>, Umberto I of Italy, and so on. The Empress of Austria had
been murdered by an Italian, but still Austria hadn’t declared war on
Italy. Gavrilo Princip wasn’t even a Serbian subject, but rather a
subject to Vienna itself. There could have been diplomatic solutions if
there had been a will.

Austria gave Serbia one month to declare itself responsible; it agreed
on everything settled by Austria but one detail, and so Austria declared
war on Serbia. Germany declared war on Russia and France and violated
the neutrality of Belgium in order to provoke France so that Great
Britain had a good reason to intervene. In the fall of <u>1914</u>, the
major European powers found themselves in the midst of a great war.

<br>

## The ‘Entente’ and the ‘Central Powers’

Standing between the lines that formed in World War One were the Central
Powers: Germany, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, Bulgaria and the Ottoman
Empire. Their adversaries were the Entente Powers, formed by Great
Britain, France, Russia, Serbia, Montenegro, Greece, Italy, Portugal,
Ireland, Romania, the US, China, Japan and others.

In East Asia, the battles revolved around German colonies: one of them
was on the Chinese mainland. On the Western front, Germany invaded
France through Belgium and conducted massacres against its population,
including (but not limited to) civilians, priests and officials who
tried to resist the occupation of the country. It was the violation of
Belgium’s neutrality, however, that allowed England to enter the war.

On the Balkan front, the Austro-Hungarian Empire and Bulgaria tried to
occupy Serbia and parts of Greece by committing acts of violence against
the civilian population. On the western front, on the other hand, the
war was soon blocked in the trenches. Officials sent soldiers out of the
trenches to die en masse so that they could conquer 200 metres of land,
only to be thrown back into battle the next day as inane sacrifices. The
war itself cost the lives of 400,000 dead soldiers during the first four
months of battle in the west between France and Germany. French and
German soldiers had gone into war with patriotic enthusiasm, but they
soon became aware of the fact that they were mere tools in the hands of
high commanders who had no intention of getting their own hands dirty.

In <u>1915</u>, when signs of fraternisation between French and German
soldiers became apparent, the headquarters of both sides repressed this
phenomenon with harsh punishments and increased the exposure of soldiers
to hate propaganda.

Italy remained neutral for a year and some liberal forces (as well as
the Church) felt it was wiser to maintain its good relationship with
Austria, but nationalist and democratic forces pushed the nation to join
the Entente in order to complete the ‘Risorgimento’ and regain the
southern part of Tyrol, an area of Trieste and Dalmatia. When the
Entente powers made a deal with Italy on its own terms, the country
entered the war. Soon, the southern front was blocked in the trenches,
just like the west.

In the east, Austrian and German troops managed to conquer great part of
what today is known as Poland, Ukraine, Lithuania and other Baltic
countries. In <u>1917</u>, the conflict entered Finland in the form of a
civil war.

In Russia, the situation was very diverse. The partial collapse of
Russian defence and economic problems laid the groundworks for the 1917
Revolution. The Bolsheviks came into power in the fall of <u>1917</u>,
right after the centrist revolutionaries’ government refused to stop the
war, which the Russian population didn’t see the point of continuing. It
was then that the Bolshevist government established the Brest-Litovsk
armistice with Germany and Austria.

USA had delivered a large amount of armaments and munition to France and
Great Britain during every war. When it entered the war in <u>1917</u>,
the immobile fronts in the south-west began to move.

In <u>1918</u>, the Central Powers were defeated, and the nations that
had been involved slowly came to terms with the human costs of the war:
around 8 million soldiers had been killed, as well as a large number of
civilians. Countries like Germany and Russia would suffer greater losses
in World War II, but for many others, this war would remain as the Great
War in everyone’s memory.

<br>

## Technology, mechanisation, industry, labour force mobilisation

Industrial production had come to a stall during the years characterized
by colonial warfare, but in the period right before the start of World
War I, new means of transport, pieces of artillery, torpedoes,
submarines, air force bombardment, chemical weapons, tanks, automobiles
and rifles were introduced in the late <u>1800s</u>; these were decisive
factors in many historical events that would occur later on (such was
the strategic importance of railways in Russia’s victories over France).
Industry had a great impact on the industry and rearmament, but many of
the modern armaments that were first produced in the <u>1890s</u> only
came into full use during World War I.

But this new technology also had unprecedented social consequences:

1.  The lack of men in industrial production led to them becoming
    soldiers and perishing in the war

<!-- -->

1.  A new feeling of ‘belonging’ was born, leading to a novel
    nationalisation of the masses

2.  People became aware that war was only a matter of political interest

3.  The bourgeoisie in Russia constituted the first example of ‘class
    enemy’, but they wouldn’t be the last

4.  Politicisation of the masses

5.  For the first time in history, women had a role in industrial
    production

The deaths of soldiers during World War I was literally a part of
industrial mass killings in a war that was fought on an industrial
scale; huge masses of people and soldiers were needed, just like
artillery and rearmaments. Soldiers and peasants of humble origins came
into contact with novel technologies they had never seen before as well
as other soldiers from regions they hadn’t even known existed. The war
created a feeling of common belonging and boosted the nationalisation of
the masses as well as the politicisation of soldiers: they realised that
it was not in the common people’s interest to be at war with each other
when they saw that common soldiers were being treated as slaved and sent
to a more or less certain death instead of the officials and top
commanders that ordered them to. This realisation was what caused the
birth of the <u>revolution against the bourgeoisie in Russia, the
November Revolution in Germany and the civil war in Finland</u>.

With the men at the front, fields and factories were filled by women to
replace the husbands, brothers and fathers that had worked there prior
to the war. After this development, many countries introduced female
suffrage at the end of World War I.

Furthermore, World War I was a turning point also because it inaugurated
a new area of warfare: it was perhaps the last war in which <u>more
soldiers died than civilians</u>. It was in modern wars that civilians
were targeted by mass bombings, terrorising, deportations,
exterminations, massacres and mass rapes. Today, being a member of the
armed forces is (statistically) the most secure position.

<br>

## A new global power rises, while empires break down

The USA was the most important power by the end of the <u>19<sup>th</sup>
century</u>; however, in the realm of international commerce, finance
and monetary policies, this fact was not fully perceived and visible.
The State were more inward-looking and depended less on foreign trade.
Its banking system was more vulnerable to cycles, and the Federal
Reserve Fund was only created after <u>1914</u>. Since a central bank
didn’t exist, the dollar’s full economic strength was not visible to
non-experts on international markets. All this changed in World War I,
when American became a world power and gave birth to the ‘American
century’.

Great European powers (such as Great Britain and France) were actually
in huge war debt to American banks. It was also the slow decline of
European imperialism that further demonstrates America’s rising
dominance on the market as well as the mechanism of operations imposed
on the war’s losers (Germany in particular).

The geopolitical consequences of the war, however, were equally immense.
The end of the Tsarist, Hapsburg and Ottoman Empire created a new
landscape in Eastern Europe, the Balkans and the Middle East. New nation
states were created and established: Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia, Poland,
Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Albania, Austria and Hungary. Italy, on the
other hand, obtained Trento and Bolzano, but not Trieste and Fiume, and
thus <u>the results of the war did not satisfy the population’s
nationalist appetite</u>. The same occurred in Romania, Hungary and
Germany, who felt that they had been treated unjustly; they developed a
craving for revenge, and <u>the stage seemed to be set for another
war</u>.

The extremely important consequences of the war were also experienced in
the Middle East. The former Ottoman Empire’s provinces were divided
according to the borders that <u>the British and the French
representatives</u> had made in <u>1960</u> according to both parties’
imperial interests. After the war, England and France would erect
protectorates in these colonies except in Mesopotamia, which became an
formally independent nation state (then substantially independent after
World War II). In <u>1970</u>, the British foreign secretary Delfoure
stated that Britain would support the establishment of a national home
for jewish people in Palestine.


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 19: The Economic Crisis of 1929 and the right-wing dictatorships
of the interwar period

Learning objectives:

1. The Peace Treaties and the Debt Cycle
2. The financial crisis of 1929
3. The Great Depression of the 1930s
4. Authoritarian and dictatorial regimes in the 1920s and 1930s</u>

<br>

## The Peace Treaties and the Debt Cycle

World War I left a number of situations open. At the end of the war,
France and Great Britain were heavily indebted with American banks for
the loans they had asked during the war. The Ottoman Empire was
dismantled, and Bulgaria wasn’t in its strongest economic state;
furthermore, Germany had to carry the burdens of these situations. The
nation was obliged to submit to the peace treaty and confess itself
guilty for all the damages of World War One (the sum Germany would pay
at the end of the war would greatly benefit France and Great Britain).

The conditions imposed upon Germany were so heavy that many were
critical of the long-term effects the treaty of Versailles would have on
international relations. One of these critics was the young economics
John Maynard Keynes, who, in the early <u>1920’</u>s, published “The
Economic Consequences of the Peace”, where he criticized the
institutional mechanism that was determined by the peace treaties and
would guarantee a potential of instant financial stability and political
stability in Europe and on the international field. <u>The whole hub of
transactions concerning the US, France, Great Britain and Germany would
greatly affect the world economy</u>.

On the other hand, the Italian delegate to one of the commissions of the
League of Nations, Gini Corrado, criticized the lack of
super-nationalist institutions that could regulate trade, commerce,
finance and so on, and the lack of such regulating, super-nationalist
bonds would lead, in his opinion, to situations in which the nation
states would prefer a policy of autarchy. <u>He especially criticized
the USA, which was not ready to build up international institutions that
would stabilise international trade, monetary systems, etc</u>.

Summing all these up, we can say that the global situation in the 1930’s
was quite predictable: the 1920’s bred hyperinflation in Germany, a
phenomenon that soon spiralled completely out of control. In 1924, a
settlement called the Dawes Plan foresaw the involvement of
international creditors who would secure a stable financial flow between
the US, Germany and other European countries.

The most important problem at this time was the transmission channel of
negative and positive developments as American banks gave loans to
European countries; many of these loans became investments in
infrastructure or other industries, boosting the EU economy for the
first few years. <u>But already in the second half of the 1920’s, US
banks implemented restrictive measures and created investment problems
in EU economies</u>. Why exactly did American banks refrain from
investing in Europe? The reason was that the American stock market had
gone through very positive developments.

In the early <u>1920</u>’s, Germany itself had caused major inflation
within the nation, and German currency was only stabilised in agreement
with the Dawes Plan with these same American banks (<u>these would issue
new loans to European countries; in this way, Germany would receive some
of this money and pay reparations to France and Britain, and these last
two would use America’s own money to repay their debt to the US</u>).

All this created a channel of transmutation for potential crisis, as
Europe had first had symptoms of crisis around <u>1928/1929</u>.

<br>

## The financial crisis of 1929

In <u>1929</u>, USA’s stock prices continued to rise. When financial
markets lose their ties with the real economy, this is normally a sign
that a crisis is imminent. On <u>October 4<sup>th</sup> of 1929</u>, the stock
market’s bubble finally burst and investors began dumping industrial
shares on the masses.

The stock market crash of 1929 was not the sole cause of the Great
Depression, as recession had already been ongoing, but <u>the crash did
accelerate the global economic collapse which it had already been a
symptom of</u>.

The Wall Street crash had a major impact on the American and world
economy; in the 1930’s, 1,352 banks with nearly 9 billion dollars went
bankrupt, and in the following years there were almost 2,300 banks which
failed with nearly 1,7 billion dollars in deposits. Businesses in many
industries were faced with failure (with almost 30,000 in 1931); given
this international flow of capital, this crisis soon seeped into Europe.

In <u>September 1929</u>, the London stock market had crushed the
beginning of a great crisis in Europe. Of course, the absence of flow of
the debt cycle and the connection between American and European banks
also had an effect on the continent, especially in Germany, Austria and
Hungary.

This banking crisis also caused the failure of heads of industries;
stocks had less value, and this meant that <u>it was difficult to
re-finance industrial activities, and thus this led to unemployment and
a lower demand for consumer goods</u>.

It was then that USA adopted protectionist measures to protect its own
industries in <u>1931</u>. The more industrialised a country was, the
harder the crisis hit, and Germany was at the top of this list. European
countries were also forced to adopt protectionist measures, such as
Italy and Great Britain.

By <u>1933</u>, nearly half of all American banks had failed, and
unemployment was approaching nearly 15 million people (40% of the entire
workforce), while in Germany unemployment was around 6 million. Was this
crash inevitable?

The answer is: not really. Cyclical crises had followed each other ever
since the creation of capitalism. The reform policies which followed
(1930’s-1970’s), however, managed to introduce a new cycle of
neo-liberalism and start over from scratch.

<br>

## The Great Depression of the 1930s

In <u>1933</u>, the Great Depression reached its peak and Franklin
Roosevelt proposed a new economic policy called the “New Deal”.

This “New Deal” was <u>a series of measures that offered the population
welfare measures, such as unemployment benefits, a public spending
policy and public jobs that would employ 9 million unemployed citizens,
especially in projects concerning hydroelectric power generators and
other infrastructural projects</u>.

These were very popular and actually attenuated the social effects of
the crisis, but it also had a variety of cons (<u>questions of economic
interest, ideological prejudice and the State’s intervention in the
economy</u>). Thus, some plans could not be put into practice, and this
may have contributed to the fact that the American economy could not
recover from the crisis before World War II.

In Germany’s case, <u>unemployment was also a huge political factor and
certainly catalysed the nation’s political orientation towards Nazi
parties and Adolf Hitler’s rise to power in early 1933</u>. Once the
Nazi party came into power, Hitler decided to adopt a new economic
policy called the ‘high ways of Adolf Hitler’ (<u>these were actually
the plans that had previously been drafted by social-democratic trade
unions whose members were later prosecuted in concentration camps</u>).
These plans were quite coherent and were put forth in various sectors
(mainly infrastructure), and Germany was able to mend its wounds
regarding unemployment at a quick pace by <u>1935</u>.

Many of Keynes’ opponents claimed that the success of the Nazi party was
all thanks to Keynes’ politics, but his general theory had only been
published in the <u>1930</u>’s and the Nazi party had already adopted
his tactics in the <u>1920</u>’s. Germany, however, was a fully
industrialised country with a macroeconomics aspect of cyclical
unemployment (not structural unemployment), and its model corresponded
perfectly to the model Keynes had explained in theory. All Hitler had
done was put it into practice.

Thanks to its economic growth in the <u>1930</u>’s, Germany entered
World War II at its full productive capacity; however, the second half
of the war brought around unfavourable consequences for the nation
because it had exhausted its last resources just to further extend the
war effort.

The USA entered the war wrecked by unemployment, yet the American
economy was bigger than the German one. Still, the nation faced
difficulties in the years immediately before entering the war (the
period of time corresponding to the Great Depression), but <u>World War
II turned this situation on its head and proved to be advantageous for
the USA</u>.

The Nazi party’s success in fighting unemployment had presented the
German government as a sort of ‘miracle-worker’, and thus the population
had put too much faith in its capabilities.

<br>

## Authoritarian and dictatorial regimes in the 1920s and 1930s

Most of the time, when we think of right-wing dictatorships, we tend to
point our fingers to Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy. Of course, these
two countries stand out not only because they were the two most decisive
European powers of the <u>1930</u>’s, but also because of the political
movements that had shaped the masses thanks to strong, ‘charismatic’
leaders that intended to re-educate the population. This was something
new at the time, as the indoctrination of a mass re-organization of
society had never occurred before and was not equalled by any other
regime at the time.

However, in the <u>1940</u>’s, we can see that parliamentarian democracy
had also been in place in France, Scandinavia, Great Britain, Ireland
and Switzerland; not even Hungary had ever abolished parliamentarian
democracy, but still had its ‘regent of the kingdom’ at the head of the
nation: Horthy Miklòs.

In every other nations, some form of dictatorship was still in power.
The first of these was probably Jòzef Piłsudski (the ‘First Marshal of
Poland’), who came into power when Poland became independent and gave
the Polish nation state its right-wing shape that it would keep
throughout the <u>1900</u>’s.

But there were some leaders that were harder to compartmentalise:
Mustafa Kemal (called ‘the father of the Turks’) was a comparatively
progressivist leader. <u>He maintained good relations with the Soviet
Union, made a number of secular reforms within his country and was a
smart and charismatic leader</u>. Other countries were graced with
monarchic dictatorships, such as Bulgaria and Romania, and not all with
the same political orientation.

In opposition to monarchic dictatorships were right-wing conservatives
such as Mussolini or Hitler. They erected authoritarian regimes where
the rule of law was suspended to such a degree that freedom of opinion
and of the press was unheard of, and the forms of government were
dictatorial.

The most interesting figure with respect to these themes was Antonio de
Oliveira Salazar of Portugal, who was one of the longest-serving
dictators of Europe. As a right-wing conservative technocrat, he
harboured little sympathy for the fascist movement that threatened to
oppress Portugal, but he was still a right-wing dictator. Antonio was
very open towards the American world and tried to modernize his country,
just like Francisco Franco.

Franco was not only the ‘guiding force’ of Spain, but also the leader of
the victorious nationalist forces (namely the Spanish military) which
had regrouped to fight against the republican left-wing government in
<u>1946</u> and had been very successful in the tragic Spanish Civil War
(<u>1946-1949</u>). Francisco Franco had not only won militarily; he had
also won the war of opinions and of propaganda thanks to the help of
Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy. Spain had also had the Catholic Church
at its side, and Franco’s government had successfully turned every
aspect of daily life into a tool to further his political agenda.

Germany’s arm hadn’t been short, either, with regards to ideological
influence. The nation had demonstrated its deft agility in warping the
minds of the countries it had occupied on various occasions: take, for
example, Italy and Croatia. Of course, there were other less
collaborative leaders, like in France, but these oppositional forces had
only represented a narrow section of French society. <u>It was the
wealthy demographic that were happy to oblige to Germany’s implicit and
explicit orders</u>.

It was with the help of the economically advanced parts of European
society that Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy could spread far and wide.
There was also a deep fear of Communism involved with regards to Nazi
sympathisers; with the nationalisation of the masses came their
intervention in politics, and parties formed by the population allied
themselves with fascist/nazi parties due to a spread of misinformation
and fear. Nationalism had also been a decisive factor, as the loss of
social distinction in the modification of the map of Europe had driven
the continents’ population to seek some sort of national identity.

Concerning anti-semitism: it had always been present, and its widespread
presence in society was nothing new. The <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u> bred the
organization of anti-semitic parties that grew more and more virulent
with the Nazi party.

<u>All these conditions, along with the various economic crises
harrowing Europe, made democratic parliamentarian systems not
particularly attractive, and the majority of the population believed
that the solution to these problems laid in the hands of the
right-wing</u>.


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 20: World War II and the Shoah

Learning objectives:

1. World War II: origins, alliances, overview
2. Chronology and major turning points, 1939-1945
3. Germany’s anti-Jewish extermination policy, 1943-1944
4. The results of the war

<br>

## World War II: origins, alliances, overview

World War II lasted from September 1<sup>st</sup>, <u>1939</u>, to September 2<sup>nd</sup>,
<u>1945</u>; its main battlefields were located in Europe, the Pacific
and Atlantic Oceans, Southeast and Southern Asia, China, the Middle
East, North Africa and the Mediterranean. Its carnage was unprecedented.
Over 60 million soldiers and civilians lost their lives, of which more
than one third were Soviet citizens. On average, 20,000 people were
killed every day, and this made it the most destructive war in human
history; 9 million Germans, 4 million Chinese and 3 million Japanese
lost their lives. The war developed in steps, but from <u>1942</u>
onwards, the primary combatants were the Axis powers (<u>Nazi Germany,
Fascist Italy and Imperial Japan; they signed agreements concerning
mutual assistance, but never made a comprehensive plan of action due to
difficulty regarding communication, while the Allied powers did</u>) and
the Allied powers (<u>Great Britain and its Commonwealth nations, the
Soviet Union and the United States</u>).

There is one other important date besides September 1<sup>st</sup>, <u>1939</u>
(when Germany invaded Poland and England and France declared war on
Hitler’s Nazi state): <u>July 7<sup>th</sup>, 1937</u>, when the Chinese-Japanese
war began. This war, when viewed separately from World War II, becomes
an integral part of it and would come to a parallel end in <u>1945</u>
with the liberation of China and the end of World War II. Imperial Japan
sought to drive its industrial development ahead; after the victories
over the Chinese and Russian Empires in the mid <u>1890s</u> and its
victories with the Entente in World War I, it was very confident in its
own force and had to find more raw materials and workforce to keep
itself at the same level of productivity. In order to do so, Japan had
to work in competition with Western colonial and imperial powers in the
Pacific. This is why it supported anti-colonial movements in Southern
Asia and colonial conquest with the annexation of islands in the Chinese
sea (plus the invasion of Manchuria). In <u>July 1937</u>, a full-scale
war sparked between China and Japan.

In the meantime, Italy tried to put the Mar Nostrum policy into place
and become the dominant Mediterranean power by basing its strategy on
that of the Ancient Roman Empire; in North Africa and the Balkans, the
politics of fascist Italy followed in the steps of late liberal Italy. A
breaking point with Western powers was the invasion of Ethiopia in
<u>1935</u>/1936; up to that moment, the relationship between these
countries and Italy had been quite good, but then Italy established a
partnership with Nazi Germany and exited the League of Nations as a
response to the sanctions imposed upon the country. Italy had also
opened questions with Nazi Germany over South Tyrol, Austria and the
Balkans, but these questions were more or less settled. They became
allies in the Spanish civil war. In <u>1939</u>, Italy occupied Albania,
which was its launchpad in its failed <u>1940</u> attempt of conquering
Greece; this unsuccessful occupation was the reason why Germany felt
obliged to come to Italy’s assistance in occupying the Balkans (a front
which Germany had not considered before).

In Germany, Adolf Hitler capitalised on the economic decline of the
country and the deep resentment towards the League of Nations (due to
the Treaty of Versailles) that boiled within its foundations. Hitler
began establishing the airforce in <u>1935</u>, which was a violation of
the 1919 Treaty, then proceeded with organising the army in <u>1936</u>.
From the start, the Nazi movement had declared that Germany needed
‘living space’, which was almost a direct declaration of war against its
Eastern neighbours, because the ‘living space’, according to the Nazis,
was in Eastern Europe. In <u>1938</u>, at the Munich Conference, Great
Britain and France agreed to the division of Czechoslovakia (against the
will of the country’s population). German-speaking areas would be
annexed by Germany, while Polish-speaking areas would be annexed by
Poland, and that contributed to keeping peace in Europe (that was their
theory). But this only stimulated Germany’s appetite for revenge. In
<u>1938</u>, Austria’s pro-fascist government was replaced by a pro-Nazi
government with the consent of the majority of Austrians.

Stalin’s Soviet Union had argued against the Munich Agreements and had
taken the Czechoslovakian government’s side in the decision of remaining
a single nation; it had also been the only country to deliver official
assistance to the Republican government of Spain, and besides this, the
USSR was the main power that opposed the moves of the Italian-German
fascist and nazi Axis in Europe. It had also repeatedly tried to create
an anti-Hitler union with Britain and France, but these attempts had
always been rejected, as Poland met them with a firm opposition (because
it was against any sort of agreement with the USSR).

In <u>1939</u>, the USSR was the only country that so far had not signed
any agreement with Nazi Germany so far. It was largely isolated, and it
was for that reason that in <u>August 1949</u> that Soviet foreign
minister signed a non-aggression pact with German foreign minister
Ribbentrop called the Molotov Plan (<u>a system originally created in
1947 in order to provide aid to rebuild the countries in Eastern Europe
that were politically and economically aligned to the Soviet Union; it
was an agreement made after the USSR refused to participate in President
Truman’s Marshall Plan, which was a pledge of economic assistance for
all European countries willing to participate</u>). There was also a
secret part of the agreement: de facto, the USSR would reassume the
position of the Tsarist Empire in its later years regarding its
relations with Lithuania, Ukraine, Belarus and so on. But it is clear
that this agreement was just a way for Germany to avoid Russia
interfering in its plans. The <u>1<sup>st</sup> of September</u>, <u>1939</u>, the
German invasion of Poland began; his was five years after the Polish
government had sought good relations with the country with treaties and
agreements that dated back to <u>1935</u>.

The ‘sleepwalking’ theory in World War I was not present in World War
II, as it was apparent that <u>the aggressive expansionist drive between
the Axis’ foreign policy was what ultimately caused the greatest was in
human history</u>. Still, we can speak of the law of ‘unintended
consequences’ in both wars; the USA’s entrance in the war was actually
triggered by the Axis’ own moves, and so on. Logistics, economic and
military potential became a bias on the battlefield with regard to
quality of armaments, as <u>the Axis’ lack of raw materials near the end
of the war made it quite clear that it could never win the war, and the
main reason why Germany’s allies had joined the Axis was because the
nation’s Blitzkrieg’s had assured it a seemingly infinite source of raw
materials</u>. Another reason why the Axis lost was because it had made
the grave mistake of attacking Russia, a decision which resulted in the
same devastating consequences as it had for Napoleon.

<br>

## Chronology and major turning points, 1939-1945

After the Nazi invasion of Poland in <u>1939</u>, Britain and France
declared war on Germany. But in <u>1940</u>, the German Blitzkrieg
overwhelmed Belgium, Holland and France; in the meantime, Britain was
under siege of heavy German bombings. Churchill decided to resist at any
cost, although lots of Brits tried to negotiate with Germans. At the
end, Germany’s attempt to invade Great Britain failed, foiling Hitler’s
plans.

In <u>1941</u>, Germany invaded the Soviet Union. Allied troops
confronted Italian and German troops in North Africa. At the <u>end of
1941</u>, Japan attacked Pearl Harbour, and this was the moment in which
<u>the US</u> (sovereign of Pearl Harbour) <u>entered the war</u>.

Three major turning points occurred in <u>1942</u>: the German-Italian
defeat in El Alamein and the German surrender at Stalingrad. This year
was also marked by the various sea battles (Battle of the Coral Sea,
Battle of the Java Sea, etc.) between Japan and the US.

Starting from <u>1943</u>, the Axis powers were on the retreat. When the
Allied troops invaded lands pertaining to Italy (Sicily and Southern
Italy), the nation surrendered. Germany occupied Northern Italy and
installed a ‘puppet regime’ under Mussolini. At the same time, British
and Indian forces defeated Japan in Southern Asia. The Red Army was
marching Westward.

In <u>1944</u>, while the Red Army pushed towards the West, Western
forces landed in Normandy and liberated Paris. Nazi Germany was cornered
from all sides.

In <u>1945</u>, the Red Army reached Poland and started entering Germany
from the East while Allied troops started conquering Western Germany. On
<u>April 30<sup>th</sup></u>, Hitler committed suicide and Germany surrendered.

In Asia, the war continued even though Japan was practically defeated,
but the nation resisted occupation. The USSR offered the face that
burden, but the US (now under President Truman) launched atomic bombs on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Japan surrendered on August 14<sup>th</sup>, and World War
II came to a definite end.

<br>

## Germany’s anti-Jewish extermination policy, 1943-1944

The genocide perpetrated against the Jewish population was a key feature
of World War II. After the Nazis came to power, there was a continuous
escalation of antisemitism and discrimination within Germany. With the
start of the war, these politics and hate crimes soon extended to Europe
under German influence, but especially to Eastern Europe, home to
millions of jews. Pogroms took place in Poland and the Balkans, and
special mobile killing squads of SS soldiers began to mass-murder the
jewish population in the Soviet Union after the invasion of there USSR.
From summer to the end of <u>1941</u>, German forces murdered around
1,400,000 people (most of them being jews). The jewish population was
deported from various European countries and concentrated in ghettos in
Eastern European countries.

As the situation became militarily difficult, Nazi and SS chiefs met in
Wannsee (close to Berlin) to decide what to do to these European jews in
the ghettos. Several proposals were put forth, and at the end, the
‘Final Solution of the Jewish Question’ (as the Nazis called it)
prescribed the systematic genocide of the jewish population through
death camps and work camps, such as Auschwitz, Treblinka, Belzec,
Chełmno, Majdanek and Sobibor; more than 4,200,000 jews died in these
camps, while about 5,700,000 jews were killed during the course of the
Final Solution.

This is now called the Shoah/Holocaust, meaning ‘destruction’. It is
also crucial to remember that, even though the majority of deaths by
genocide were jewish, that other minorities were subjected to the same
treatment: Soviet prisoners of war, members of the LGBTQIA+ community,
ethnic Poles, Ukrainians and Belorussians, Roma, the disabled and
political opponents.

<br>

## The results of the war

Despite winning the war, Britain lost much of its Empire. The
developments in the colonies were already pointing at this final
outcome, and Britain was ready to accept that; however, it still saw
itself as a main world power, a position defended until the
<u>1950s</u>. The structurally weakened British Empire began to
scramble. The War led to the revival of US economy, and half of the
industrial world economy was American from that moment on. The USSR had
taken the brunt of the war and had been weakened by the consequences of
the war (differently from the US), but it emerged as a major winner. The
US and the USSR rose to become the world’s two superpowers and entered
the Cold War, which dominated world politics until <u>1990</u>. Europe
was divided between US and USSR alliances along the lines of the
<u>1945</u> Yalta agreement between Stalin and the West. The end of the
Soviet Union later on completely changed European geopolitics.


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 21: The affirmation of Communism and the USA-USSR confrontation

Learning objectives:

1. The Russian Revolution of 1917 and the Chinese Revolution of 1949
2. Industrialisation and repression under Communist regimes
3. Cold War in an ‘American century’
4. Cultural empire and anti-Americanism

<br>

## The Russian Revolution of 1917 and the Chinese Revolution of 1949

In Russia, <u>1917</u> saw the break-out of the revolution; soldiers
mutinied, peasants seized land from the nobility, workers took over
factories and non-Russian nationalities asserted their independence.
This was very similar to the 1905 Revolution; both created problems
regarding hunger and unemployment and triggered a movement that changed
the structure of the counsels (called the ‘Soviets’ by the Russians),
especially in <u>1917</u>.

Within a year, the Tsarist monarchy was gone and the Soviets were
catapulted into power. There were two Revolutions in <u>1917</u>: the
first was the Provisional Revolutionary Government (February
Revolution), which was formed by a broad coalition of forces
(bolsheviks, socialists, mensheviks, etc.). This Provisional Government
declared the monarchy to be obsolete and that it had been substituted by
a Republic; but under the revolutionary socialist Alexander Kerensky,
Russia decided to continue the war, a decision which did not need the
favour of the population (who were opposed to this and in agreement with
the Bolsheviks, whose motto was ‘peace, land and bread’).

The Bolsheviks, under the leadership of Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov/Lenin,
who had been transported under the coverage of the German government
(who knew he would favour Russia’s armistice), led the Bolsheviks into
power in the October Revolution (early November in the Western
calendar). Few people expected this fragile hold to last, but the
Bolsheviks (the ‘Reds’) consolidated their power after a bitter Civil
War (against the ‘Whites’, who were joined by foreign powers and
consisted of monarchists and Tsarist sympathisers), then renamed
themselves the Communist Party.

From the early <u>1920</u>’s onwards, many socialist parties split
throughout Europe and named themselves Communist parties. But it should
always be remembered that the actual split of the worker’s movement was
World War I because those who would form the Communist party in Germany,
for example, did not support the war in <u>1914</u> and stuck to the
line of the socialist movement; the split regarded the propaganda for
and against the war.

In <u>1922</u>, the USSR was founded and remained the sole world outpost
against capitalism. But then in the late <u>1940</u>’s, Communism began
to spread as Communist parties took power in Eastern Europe after World
War II. Eastern European Communist governments were created by occupying
Soviet troops after the Yalta Conference (<u>1920</u>’s). In some of
these countries (such as in Eastern Germany and Hungary), there had also
been strong workers’ movements before World War II, and thus this
phenomenon wasn’t solely a post-war occurrence.

But Europe wasn’t the only instance of Communism in the <u>1920</u>’s;
the Chinese Communist party was founded in <u>1921</u> in this
ideological ‘red wave’. In <u>1937</u>, the Communist Party and their
militia co-organised the resistance against the Japanese occupation of
Manchuria together with the Kuomintang nationalist party of China. From
<u>1937</u> to <u>1945</u>, both the Communist Party and the Kuomintang
fought against Japan in the Second World War.

With the beginning of the Cold War, however, the differences between the
nationalists and the communists bred a bloody Civil War that ended in
<u>1949</u> with the victory of the Communists, led by Mao Zedong. When
Mao triumphantly proclaimed the People’s Republic of China in
<u>1949</u>, Communism became a global movement, and over the next
several decades, also took hold in North Korea, Cuba, Vietnam, Cambodia
and Laos. By the <u>1970</u>’s, Communist rule encompassed 1/3 of the
World’s population.

<br>

## Industrialisation and repression under Communist regimes

In both Russia and China, the Communist party was everywhere: education,
the arts, social life, etc.. All these factors of daily life were
monopolised by the party and reinforced by executions and imprisonment
to achieve almost total control. Being a member of the party ensured a
chief means to status and privilege; but <u>the vision in both Communist
parties triggered a vehement search for ‘enemies’, that is, those who
rejected or questioned the policies of this leadership</u>.

In the USSR, this period was known as the ‘Great Terror’ of
<u>1936-1939</u>, in which many high-ranking members of the party were
either executed or imprisoned for inexistent or silly crimes. A
self-perpetuating wave of fear engulfed the country, particularly in
elite circles: citizens denounced one another in fear of being denounced
themselves.

Something similar took place during China’s cultural revolution during
the late <u>1960</u>’s, as Mao Zedong mobilised millions of young Red
Guards and sent them across the country to confront any who might be
taking a capitalist road. Something similar to a Civil War ensued until
Mao Zedong put a stop to this tremendous upheaval.

The other important aspect of Communism was industrialisation: much of
the world expected Communism to first pop up in the most developed
countries, where the intrinsic contradiction of capitol would ignite a
spark of revolution. But, to everyone’s surprise, Communism reared its
head in Russia and China, who were more agrarian than industrial at the
time.

In the USSR, collectivisation radically transformed rural forms of
living in a brutal way that caused periods of hunger and social
disarray. But the country’s central planning system pivoted
industrialisation, as long as heavy industry similar industries were
concerned. These types of industries had also shown a natural tendency
for state protectionism in capitalist countries. The transformation of
the USSR was impressive; but <u>what the central planning system would
fail at was meeting the demands of the industrial mass-consumer society
that developed in the 1960’s</u>. In most Eastern European countries,
the absence of market mechanisms created shortages in the supply of
consumer’s goods, which favoured corruption and caused increasing
dissatisfaction in the <u>1970</u>’s and <u>1980</u>’s. This was
probably the major, single cause of the Communist regime in Eastern
Europe.

China, who also took the path of radical agricultural/industrial
transformation, took another oath in the late <u>1970</u>’s under Deng
Xiaoping: a law-enforced, state-controlled market economy in the
agriculture and consumer-goods sectors, which allowed a strong export
sector to develop and satisfied the demand of the population.

<br>

## Cold War in an ‘American century’

On <u>March 12th 1947</u>, US President Truman offered a statement to a
joint session of Congress in which he said that he believed it must be
the policy of the United States to support free people who were
resisting a tempered subjugation by armed minorities or outside
pressures. The subjugation he referred to was Communism; any Communist
policy, even if peacefully pursued, was considered a fruit of outside
pressure or a Communist conspiracy in the eyes of America.

In the <u>1970</u>’s, Communist rule reached its peak (albeit many
countries labeled as Communist were actually not Communist, per say).
President Truman’s speech of <u>1947</u> could be considered the final
‘straw’ that pivoted the Cold War; Truman’s doctrine of ‘Containment’
implemented the deployment of US bases around the world and military or
CIA interventions in Korea, Vietnam, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Iran,
Chile, Guatemala, Haiti and Panama. Subversive activity and government
overthrow characterized the USA’s intervention in various countries.

<br>

## Cultural empire and anti-Americanism

Anyone who lived in the decades after WWII can testify to the
incisiveness of American influence in all sectors of life; these have
shaped the imagery of generations from an aesthetic, idealogical and
cultural point of view in most countries of the world. This has been
interpreted as an extraordinary political success. In the euphoria of
<u>1991</u>, after the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the
eradication of a ‘bad idea’, the American political scientist Joseph Nye
published “Soft Power”, in which he argued that there was an
irreversible transformation of American power which was all about
cultural influence and the ability to influence the behavior of others
to obtain a favourable outcome. This would come to characterize American
foreign policy in the future.

In <u>1994</u>, as a response to Nye’s book, “Science of Coercion” by
Christopher Simpson pointed out that Soft Power practises had only
rarely offered alternatives to violence; instead, <u>they had been an
integral part of a cultural strategy based on the premise of the
strongest government to the detriment of the weakest, on the basis of
which coercion and manipulation warped general forms of understanding
within society</u>.

Colonel Ralph Peters says:

“There will be no peace…violent conflict will dominate the headlines,
but cultural and economic struggles will be steadier and ultimately more
decisive. The de facto role of the US armed forces will be to keep the
world safe for our economy and open to our cultural assault. To those
ends, we will do a fair amount of killing.”

With regard to Anti-Americanism, political scientist Brendon O’Connor of
the United States Studies Centre suggests that <u>anti-Americanism
cannot be isolated as a consistent phenomenon and that the term
originated as a rough composite of stereotypes, prejudices and
criticisms towards Americans or the United States, evolving to more
politically-based criticism</u>. French scholar Marie-France Toinet says
use of the term “is only fully justified if it implies systematic
oppression — a sort of allergic reaction — to America as a whole”.


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 22: “Third World”, political Islam, decline of Soviet communism

Learning objectives:

1. The Nonalignment movement
2. The idea of a “Third World”
3. The rise of political Islam
4. The Communist collapse

<br>

## The Nonalignment movement

After World War II, the return of the colonial status quo was
impossible. The weakening of European powers, the emergence of Cold War
bipolarity and the beginning of internationalisation within the
framework of the United Nations Charter would put a movement of
emancipation into motion, which would have been favoured by a number of
cumulative factors and converging forces.

The group of newly independent countries and those still struggling to
obtain it became an arena for the <u>competing models of
internationalisation</u>. However, many of these countries did not
accept those competing visions passively, but tried to promote their own
national agendas. The new nations were undertaking a path to create
their own network through their association on the international stage.
The first of these struggles was aimed at <u>avoiding colonies from
ending up under colonial control of the US or the USSR</u>.

A significant demonstration of these nations’ desire for autonomy and
their capacity of self-organization was represented by the Bandung
conference of <u>1955</u>, held in Indonesia. A conference had already
been held in Colombo (Ceylon) in <u>1954</u>, and on that occasion,
India, Pakistan, Burma (today, Myanmar), Indonesia and Ceylon showed
their position against colonialism and the nuclear arms race and were
instead in favour of <u>peace and détente</u>. The following year in
April in Bandung (Indonesia), 29 states (for the most part, neutral)
opposed to both colonialism and neocolonialism not only by European
powers, but also by the US and the USSR. Of the 29 nations that were
represented in the conference, six were from Africa: Egypt, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Liberia, Libya and Sudan. The leading contributors of the Bandung
conference were Burma, India, Indonesia, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. Bandung
had certainly had great importance, but it was not yet the founding
moment of the Nonalignment movement.

Some countries accused China of leaning on the USSR’s support and
displaying <u>expansionistic behavior</u> in Asia; for the most part,
these countries condemned pactomania, that is, the pressure to join one
pact or another to decide on nuclear disarmament. In the end of the
conference, a declaration of the Ten Principles of Bandung were issued,
which focused on themes such as <u>economic and cultural cooperation,
human rights, national self-determination and International peace</u>.

The Nonalignment movement was only born in <u>1961</u>, and the term
referred to the participants of the NAM conference of that same year,
held in Belgrade, Yugoslavia; the objectives of the Nonalignment
movement remained <u>the lessening of military tensions and the proposal
of alternatives to escape the blackmail of compromises imposed by the
Cold War’s protagonists</u>. The events occurring in the background of
this conference were <u>French nuclear tests in the Sahara, the
unsuccessful invasion of Cuba by the US, the construction of the Berlin
Wall and the flickering tension between China and USSR/India</u>.
Differently form Bandung, this conference saw the presence of Cuba, by
which the alliance extended to Latin America (previously too dependent
on Western powers). The hosting country was Yugoslavia, which would
remain the only European member of the Nonalignment movement; this would
draw political prestige from the opposition against the Western and
Eastern bloc.

<br>

## The idea of a “Third World”

The idea of a Third World was as powerful as a fact, articulated by
politicians, researchers, intellectuals and journalists in developing
countries. It was individuals like Che Guevara (Latin America),
Jawaharlal Nehru (India), Frantz Fanon (Algiers) and Gamal ‘Abd al-Naser
(Egypt), however, that brought this concept to life and employed it in
their beliefs and philosophy. Their idea of Third World (also known as
‘developing countries’, ‘global South’ or ‘poor countries’ by First
World nations) was a search of the historical significance of their
countries and movements in a world focused on the conflicts between the
capitalist West and the communist East. They sought to distill a common
meaning from the variety of struggles that had recently been overcome:
spokesmen for the Third World distinctly opposed the concept that
developed countries needed to ‘civilize’ them or help them develop. It
wasn’t an innate element, but rather colonial rule that had caused the
backwardness and poverty present in these nations, and this divided the
world into imperialists and nations who were exploited by them and were
known as the <u>progressive, revolutionary South</u>.

In the UN, countries pressed for more rapid decolonisation so that they
could all focus on any issue other than the Cold War (which dominated
the majority of official conversations). A growing number of independent
nations made the UN swell into an organization dominated by African and
Asian states, which gave the Third World countries an ample stage to
develop their ideas. In recent years, however, we can see that many of
these countries are blackmailed by stronger ones to behave in a certain
way to favour a specific political agenda. But in the <u>1960’s</u> and
<u>70’s</u>, the Third World managed to become a court of world opinion
that fought for what the majority of the world’s countries strived for
(however, major capitalists countries such as the Soviet Union and China
still held most of the power).

The Nonalignment movement remained half-completed due to the various
conflicts and also because of the internals struggles between political
and social models that tended to favour capitalistic models rather than
Third World ones. Some countries were under suspicion of leaning towards
one or the other bloc; indeed, between <u>1960</u> and <u>1980</u>,
Indonesia and China moved from pro-Soviet to pro-American positions. On
the other hand, this Third-World position expressed itself in many Arab
countries which spoke of Arab socialism and leaned on the Soviet Union
for economic and political cooperation (internally, however, they
harboured anti-communist sentiments).

Generally, countries fought for decolonisation, but depended on
<u>military aid from the USSR</u>, while countries with financial
problems depended on <u>Western aid</u>. From an economic point of view,
in the <u>1970’s</u>, OPEC (which had been founded to aid Third-World
countries that exported petroleum) had had great success by reaching a
four-fold increase in oil prices so that <u>wealth, financial resources
and capital</u> would flow from First World to Third World countries,
but many of these capitals flew back to New York and other Third World
countries had to pay higher energy bills, along with increasingly
expensive raw materials; what followed was an ever-worsening debt
problem that lasted from <u>1970</u> to <u>1995</u> caused by this
radical interference in internal policies with market-oriented reforms.
Still, after <u>1990</u>, when some of these debt problems were settled
through debt cancellations in the early <u>2000’s</u> thanks to the
International Monetary Fund, which saw that the Third World would go
into detriment of prices weren’t attenuated. But there was another
aspect: in Latin America and Southeast Asia, there was a growing wealth
in manufacturing countries after <u>1990</u>, leading to the increase in
wealth within those countries thanks to the low cost of the labour force
and the diminishing costs of transportation/information, which allowed
these developments.

<br>

## The rise of political Islam

When talking about Political Islam, it is useless to refer to pre-modern
times, as the religion itself and politics were inseparable at the time,
like Christianity; thus, it is essential that we speak of a modern
phenomenon. After the end of the Mughal and Ottoman Empire, Islam began
giving rise to the idea that State and religion should be separate; this
distinction created the concept of Political Islam. Still, to understand
it, pre-modern history is important. The parabola of Islam and Islamic
expansion (which lasted for around a thousand years) was an age of glory
embedded in the timeline of human history — it was a centre for
cultural, artistic and spiritual development. In the <u>1600’s</u>,
under the impact of colonialism and European expansion, Islam was
marginalised and crushed under the weight of these phenomena. In the
<u>20<sup>th</sup> century</u>, Islam was further marginalised with the creation of
Israel to the detriment of the Palestinian population.

The political struggle of the Islamic community is necessary to heal all
these wounds caused by history; the basic narrative of political Islam
is eschatological as well. It tells us of a golden age, then a decay in
history that can, must and will be healed in the future. Political
movements of Islamic inspiration can be found in the Indian subcontinent
in the second half of the <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u> and in the form of
political parties (especially in India) since the <u>20<sup>th</sup> century</u>.
The Muslim Brotherhood, for example, is an important transitional Sunni
Islamist organization that was founded by Hassan al-Banna in Egypt in
<u>1928</u>; it would be influential in Syria, Jordan, Palestine and
other areas.

After World War II, independence movements of secular nationalist
character came to power in areas pertaining to the former Ottoman
Empire, and military elites had a strong role in many Islamic countries,
often representing the most important institution of the Republican
state. One example of this is Gamal Abdel Nasser’s Arab Socialism in
Egypt, as well as efforts of modernization and secularisation of the
nation (all the while rejecting Marxism and communism from outside
forces). Since the <u>1980’s</u>, secular and nationalist political
orientation ended a period of crisis. Corrupt governments failed to meet
the economic expectations of the citizens, who faced a growing sense of
social inequality and the rapidly worsening phenomenon of youth
unemployment, who had suffered from a lack of perspective. Political
participation and critique were discouraged by oppression, and
discontent regarding the expansion of Israel (with the help of the US)
added to this general sense of frustration. Political Islam began to be
listened to by the younger people thanks to the growing wealth of the
oil monarchies in the Arab peninsula; the criticism of political Islam
was directed against the lack of social equality and honest government.

The humiliation of muslim societies was attributed to a moral and
religious decay. Western influence was also accused, because it promoted
feminism and ‘immoral lifestyles’, as well as Communism because of its
atheist worldview. Islam is divided among several sects/branches, and it
is so politically as well. But what they all strived for was a
<u>division between religion and politics</u> and the creation of
institutions that conformed to the practises established by the Prophet
Mohammed; in the social and private sphere, a religious and secular
lifestyle should be substituted by one that conforms to Islam. This
separation is innocuous in the eyes of Political Islam, as Islam’s
prescriptions can regulate all aspects of human life. Today,
Afghanistan, Mauritania, Pakistan and Iran are the references for
countries with Islam within their Republican constitutions; there are
kingdoms that build their legitimacy on that religion. Many other
countries today accept the Shariah, while many parties of Political
Islam hold the majority and the government. In some cases (such as in
Egypt and Algeria), these were overthrown by a military coupe. The
history of political Islam in the <u>20<sup>th</sup> century</u> has been a success
story.

<br>

## The Communist collapse

After <u>1979</u>, the USA, under Reagan, stationed new types of cruise
missiles in Europe and announced the militarisation of open space,
triggering a new arm’s race, which turned out to be a heavy economic
burden for the USSR. The USSR established pro-Soviet Afghan governments
by intervening militarily in Afghanistan (<u>1979-1989</u>) while the
USA sustained local Islamic resistance leaders as well as foreign
fighters of the Arab world that came to the nation’s succour (like Osama
Bin Laden); the arm’s race in the Afghan war exhausted the resources of
the Soviet economy.

In <u>1985</u>, Mikhail Gorbachev was nominated the general secretary of
the Communist Party, which was the highest power position in the union.
In <u>1986</u>, he signed the Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces Treaty
with the US, which partly ended the arm’s race, then introduced
transparency policies (Glasnost) and economic restructuring policies
(Peristroyka), but these reform measures only piled up on the Union’s
economic hiccups. In <u>1986</u>, the nuclear power plant in Chernobyl
exploded, blasting a metaphoric crater in the environment and in the
USSR’s credibility, as the information policy of the administration in
the early phase of the accident was all but transparent. Food and
clothing shortages, unbridled corruption and impoverishment in the years
that followed all the way up to <u>1990</u> created a deep moral crisis
that didn’t spare the elites.

In <u>1991</u>, Gorbachev resigned and Boris Yeltsin took over. In the
following year, <u>1991</u>, the USSR was dissolved, and many Soviet
republics gained independence. This process was also catalysed by what
was happening in Poland; in <u>1978</u>, a Polish bishop (Wojtyla) was
elected Pope of the Roman Catholic Church, and in <u>1980</u>, the
Catholic union Solidarnosc was founded. In <u>1981(3</u>, under general
Jaruzelski, the authoritarian communist government of the Polish
People's Republic drastically restricted everyday life by introducing
martial law and a military junta in an attempt to throttle political
opposition, in particular the Solidarity Movement (although martial law
was lifted in <u>1983</u>, many political prisoners were not released
until a general amnesty in <u>1986</u>). Under the impression of Soviet
developments, in <u>1989</u>, a round table between the Opposition
forces and the Communist government negotiated re-elections, in which,
in <u>1990</u>, the leader of the Solidarity Movement, Lech Walesa, was
elected president.

In most of the other European countries, the transition was non-violent;
Communism had long lost its moral and ethical motivations among people
in power, many who were surprisingly good at transforming into
liberal/conservative/nationalist politicians (such as in Hungary,
Czechoslovakia, Romania, GDR and Romania) who remained in some positions
of power. Some used their leading position in the industry during the
period of privatisation to steal wealth from social property and grow to
become the elite in this post-Communist era. In Romania, however, the
fall of the Union gave way to a kind of revolution and secret-service
coup against Ceaucescu. From <u>1990</u> to <u>1991</u>, former USS
Republics obtained independence, such as Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia,
Ukraine and Belorussia, while many more did the same in Yugoslavia
between <u>1991</u> and <u>1992</u> (Croatia, Slovenia and Bosnia;
Yugoslavia only disbanded in <u>2000</u>).

In China, after the fall of the USSR, foreign policy started favouring
America, which sought to play out China against the USSR. In
<u>1978</u>, Deng Xiaoping (the leader of China) jumpstarted an economic
reform process that foresaw liberalisation processes. In <u>1989</u>, at
the high of the Soviet crisis, students revolted and demanded political
reforms similar to those in the USSR. During the Tiananmen Square
protests of <u>1989</u>, protestors were massacred by the armed forces;
still, most Chinese people were focused on working hard to improve their
economic position, something that the Chinese system not only
facilitated, but offered. Under Jiang Zemin, the Communist party would
later on secure and cement its leading role for years to come. Mass
consumerism spread, and the Chinese economy started to rebound from two
hundred years of humiliation.


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 23: Global changes: demographic, social, political and cultural
changes

Learning objectives:

1. The growth of the world population
2. Progress and inequality
3. Nationalism and democracy in the global process
4. Cultural convergence an divergence

<br>

## The growth of the world population

Since the <u>1700</u>’s, we have observed declining death rates
throughout the world (albeit with geographically unequal distribution).
It was progresses in medicine and changes in agriculture, however, that
made this possible. At the same time, birth rates stayed high, as
declining death rates meant that more children could reach adulthood and
procreate. <u>But why did birth rates drop only decades after death
rates?</u>

First of all because of the inertia of social conditions. For example, a
rise of productivity in agriculture brought about an expansion of the
work force; less people were needed to grow crops, richer than ever as a
nutritional base. The work force became wage-labourer: <u>more children
meant more work force, and therefore more income so that they were
encouraged to keep birth rates high</u>.

The second is the inertia of customs. <u>Even when material conditions
change, it normally takes several generations to change reproductive
behavior and social norms</u>. In Europe, only after industrialisation
had been completed did birth rates fall; before, <u>dynamic population
growth had exerted a strong demographic pressure on land</u>. The
agricultural industry could not provide the entire population with
sufficient crops, and industrialisation couldn’t catch up (except in the
UK) and support the local rural population. This was why, between
<u>1849</u> and <u>1940</u>, several million Europeans had left the
continent and migrated to the Americas.

In China and East Asia, <u>the demographic pressure on land was average
and ended around 1980</u>. Full industrialisation caused a <u>radical
change in the age structure</u>: East Asian society had an average
raging population, and some countries even tended to have a negative
natural population growth.

In Africa, even if with some differences within the continent, <u>the
average fertility rates were still high, and this produced a dynamic
population growth and, as a consequence, prolific migration flows</u>.

These modern-day migration streams caused by population growth changed
their direction with respect to previous years. Overall, the estimates
for demographic growth rounded out by the <u>21<sup>st</sup> century</u>. By the
<u>22<sup>nd</sup> century</u>, the world’s population might even decrease.

However, fears regarding food supply had skyrocketed in the past thanks
to Thomas Robert Malthus, a British economist who theorised that
<u>exponential increases in population growth would surpass arithmetical
increases in food supply with dire consequences, unless population
growth was arrested by such means as famine, war, or the control of
reproduction through moral restraint</u>. These fears have been
nourished over and over again and have been proven wrong, however;
<u>agricultural and industrial productivity growth have widely surpassed
demographic growth</u>. In the <u>20<sup>th</sup> century</u> alone, if the world
population had grown fourfold, the world economy had grown
fourteen-fold. <u>Famine is caused by the distribution of wealth, and
not because of population growth</u>.

Malthus was a professor of political economy at the East India Company
College, and this largely explains the foundation of his theories; the
UK had long tried to engineer/control population growth through
administrative means. We had seen this logic at work in the
<u>1870</u>’s when millions of Indians starved to death and the British
had proclaimed that it would be ‘immoral’ to sustain the ‘overbreeding’
poor British population.

In <u>1920</u>, Harvard University professor Lothrop Stoddard published
his “The Rising Tide of Colour against White World-Supremacy”.
Sterilisation and birth control were fixed ideas that formed a core part
of eugenic theories; the battalion of liberal and left-leaning eugenic
intellectuals in the <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u> was immense (Keynes formed a
part of this sector), and they pretty much all sustained these theories.
After WWII, the founding director of UNESCO (Julian Haxley), the
Rockefeller foundation and the Population Council (founded in
<u>1952</u>) also depicted a grim future unless wise people would not
preside as the administrative power in the world of birth-planning.

In <u>1968</u>, Paul R. Ehrlich published his “Population Bomb”, which
predicted worldwide famine in the <u>1970</u>’s and <u>1980</u>’s due to
overpopulation. He advocated immediate action to limit population
growth, and although none of his prediction ever came true , he is still
acclaimed as a credible expat on population methods. This shows what
<u>powerful corporate of international organizations stand behind these
theories on overpopulation</u>.

One other long-time development that warped our world is urbanisation.
Urban life was the minority form of human dwelling for a millennia and
has now become predominant over rural living; in industrialised
countries, demographic changes and the rise of life expectancy has
transformed the age structure of the population. <u>There are ever fewer
young people and more retired ones</u>, and this creates problems for
the welfare system if no new changes are introduced (e.g.: pension
funds). When experts say that something should be done ‘for the sake of
the younger people’ at the expense of the elderly, it is better not to
fall for it. Playing one generation against another is a demagogical
trick. <u>It is the question of the distribution of wealth, because it
is productivity that we should look it. Today, the work of one worker
can sustain one retired person. The problem is that capital was
liberated from part of its obligations to contribute to social welfare
because the country must be competitive</u> (e.g.: ’we can’t ask the
enterprises to give x sum for social welfare provisions’). Thus, a
minority of rich people grow richer and richer. Like with the Malthusian
argument, it is all about how resources are distributed.

<br>

## Progress and inequality

The globalized world is divided by an ever-growing gap between rich and
poor countries; if the average income gap between these was two-fold in
the <u>1800</u>’s, it was nine-fold in the <u>1900</u>’s, and in the
<u>2000</u>’s it was sixty-fold. Even if absolute poverty has been
reduced (thanks to the rise of East Asia and China), the general picture
is of a dramatic rise of inequality that has birthed radical
anti-globalization movements.

But behind the problem of unequal international distribution of wealth
is the problem of unequal social distribution of wealth; whereas at the
beginning of the <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u> the richest <u>5%</u> of the human
population was 7 times richer than the poorest <u>20%</u>, by the end of
the <u>20<sup>th</sup> century</u> it was 16 times richer. In <u>2000</u>, the
richest <u>2%</u> of adult individuals owned more than half of all
global wealth, with the richest <u>1%</u> accounting for <u>40%</u> of
global assets. Today, <u>1%</u> of the world’s population owns more than
the other <u>99%</u> of mankind put together.

Overall, demographic growth and economic growth imply a huge use of
resources. We have previously underlined the environmental effects of
industrialisation, which brought about an increase in entropy and
pollution. It appears that biodiversity is diminishing and more species
are going extinct. All these problems have caused worldwide
environmental problems and movements to protect it.

Here, one should distinguish practical solutions that should be
implemented (and lead to a much more just use of resources) from
apocalyptic scenarios (such as the one depicted in “Population Bomb”).
Western culture is always inclined to develop such apocalyptic
narratives; some say that we have entered a new geo-logical era, the
‘Anthropocene’, but isn’t this expression the product of an
anthropocentric worldview? The end of the human species and everything
else will leave the planet literally untouched. So what does the slogan
‘save the planet’ mean? <u>The planet will be fine when our species will
be extinct</u>. We should tackle these problems right now in an equal
way (not to the detriment of the poor) and reflect on who needs to use
mystifying language and to which ends they try to manipulate us.

<br>

## Nationalism and democracy in the global process

The idea of ‘nation’ was an idea that, in its modern form, had European
origins; it was the belief that <u>a group of people share common
culture, history and territory and that deserve to govern themselves
independently (the concept of sovereignty</u>). In Europe, this was the
guiding principle for most of the States after <u>WWI</u>; most of them
had become nation States. Still, the other parts of the world lived
under imperial or colonial rule and their political identification was
typically either regional or local. They had stronger bonds to religion
and spiritual, and tribal belonging was very important.

But with the anti-colonial movements, intellectuals from these countries
took the Europeans’ concept of nation as an example for their
revolution. Sons and daughters of the èlites went to metropolitan
countries and formulated their opposition to colonialism in the terms of
philosophies and political thoughts they had learned in Europe. An
example is the Philippines: the early anti-colonial movements were
strongly influenced by the Spanish liberal movements in the <u>19<sup>th</sup>
century</u>. These were, in their eyes, a tool to struggle against
colonialism. <u>Why should people claim the right to self-determination
in Europe and then deny the colonies’ rights to the same thing?
Nationalism became a feasible tool in the struggle for independence</u>.

Also Communism, just as the entire socialist tradition, is
internationalist. But before you can become an internationalist, you
must recognise that <u>the nation is a natural form of human
organization</u> (in Marxism, it’s described as <u>a stage in human
development</u>). It’s a <u>sign of progress and modernization</u>
compared to tribal or feudal society. The USSR helped young nations
created national languages, literature, etc.. The Soviet Union was
therefore internationalist and agreed that this was a very important
principle. Some of the European and Asian communist states had
particularly emphasised on the concept of ‘nation’; some were even
called National Communists (such as Albania, China, Vietnam and Romania,
where Communist parties had sparked nationalistic discourse).

On the other hand, nationalism had also been challenged by various
factors:

1.  Globalization (big enterprises, IMF, World Bank, interference with
1.  Ethnic Separatism (competing national projects in many countries)
2.  World Governance (UN peacekeeping, r2p, human rights limiting the sovereignty of weaker nations)
3.  Regional supranational bodies (EU)
4.  Religion (the Catholic church, Muslim umma; these are all transnational)

As far as the idea of democracy is concerned, modern democracy developed
in the West (following the American and French revolutions), even if the
immediate outcomes of these revolutions did not necessarily perfectly
fit with our present understanding of the concept (e.g., the liberal
constitutional monarchies in Europe from the late <u>19<sup>th</sup> century</u> up
until WWI didn’t resemble our present-day democracies, either).

By <u>1914</u>, only a few Western European countries and former British
colonies were fully democratic; <u>democracy only came around full-swing
after WWI</u>. Women’s right to vote, however, had only started to
slowly diffuse between <u>1890</u> and <u>1950</u>. Many Eastern
European countries had been criticized by Western European politicians
for only being democratic ‘on paper’, as their nationalistic views
impeded the development of a well-rounded democracy. After <u>1945</u>,
however, democracy started to spread to other countries. Where democracy
couldn’t properly develop, dictatorships took hold. The only results
that came from anti-colonial struggles and protests, however, were more
often than not one-party regimes.

In the post-Communist era, democracy started to replace the Soviet
Union’s influence with substantial (but also just formal) democracy,
especially in Eastern Europe. <u>Constitutional freedom, however, was
drastically reduced due to the strong nationalist attitudes that
followed after the dissolution of the USSR</u>.

It’s in the Post-democratic era (a term coined by Colin Crouch, an
English sociologist and political scientist) that:

1.  Financial an industrial concentration governs the international economy
1.  Financial and industrial concentration governs the national economy
2.  Supranational bodies (UN, IMF, EU) impose new rules on national politics
3.  The markets impose new rules on national politics
4.  Functional elites dictate “the only possible solution”

<br>

## Cultural convergence and divergence

Another point that Reilly raises is cultural globalization. This is a
difficult aspect, as it is about authenticity, or the lack thereof,
which are both difficult to substantiate. Since the emergence of a
poignant, general fear of los, cultural globalization has sparked heated
debates in favour or against it. We have spoken of Soft Power already;
in this case, Consumerist globalization means:

1.  Fast food, blue jeans, music, movies
1.  Consumerism and advertising
2.  Post-Mao Consumerist Culture (China)
3.  Westernisation/Americanisation

Westernisation, however, stretches beyond appearances. To think that a
Chinese citizen, for example, thinks like an American just because they
wear blue jeans is an extreme act of hubris. When it comes to
globalization, one may wonder: <u>what is more globalized, McDonald’s,
or anti-globalization hero, José Bové?</u> Foodstuffs, music, medicine
practices and religion have all stretched beyond their traditional
spheres. However, this isn’t new. The problem of authenticity has been
around ever since humanity had constructed ships or carriages. Even
languages could be considered at the mercy of globalization:

1.  French, Spanish, Russian and English were diffused during
    colonialism

<!-- -->

1.  Chinese was diffused via migration movements

2.  Arabic was diffused through cultural channels

3.  Chinese has become the most-spoken mother tongue

4.  English is now the most-diffused “lingua franca”

5.  Meanwhile, 800 Amerindian languages have disappeared

With regards to cults, religions, beliefs and habits:

1.  Diffusion of Christianity and Islam beyond their places of origin

<!-- -->

1.  Diffusion of Buddhist meditation practices

2.  Diffusion of scientific culture

3.  Diffusion of traditional medicine practices

4.  Diffusion of “ethno food”

5.  Fusion of “world music”


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 24: Two waves of economic globalization?

Learning objectives:

1. Periodising globalization
2. Industrialisation, capital market and financial flows
3. Trade, investment, migration and factor prices
4. Summing up similarities and differences

<br>

## Periodising globalization

The first wave of globalization occurred during a fertile period of
colonisation when trade and money flows virtually flooded the whole
globe. The main criticisms of this came from economic historians of the
modern and contemporary period who argued that, even though a world
economy was established during the phase of colonisation, it
nevertheless <u>lacked the qualities of globalization</u> for three main
reasons:

1.  The commodities and values comprised by those flows were too low a
    percentage of world economy

<!-- -->

1.  There were no real world markets and price convergency for the
    greatest part of commodities

2.  High transportation, transaction and information costs hindered the
    integration of long-distance markets

These were also the considerations of the two historians Baldwin and
Martin; they were the ones who recognised a first wave of globalization
during the period between <u>1870</u> and <u>1914</u> and a second one
that began after <u>1960</u>. Baldwin and Martin argued that, on the
surface, the two waves have much in common, but after a more detailed
and in-depth examination, they concluded that <u>these two are also
characterized by remarkable differences</u>. They analysed the following
points:

Industrialisation and income inequalities

Capital markets and financial integration, trade, investment, migration
and other costs

Economic beliefs and the policy-making

<br>

## Industrialisation, capital market and financial flows

As far as industrialisation and inequalities regarding income are
concerned, Baldwin and Martin generally confronted what we would call
first (global north) and third world (global south).

When the first wave of globalization hit, <u>the income inequality
between north and south was less dramatic than in the second wave</u>;
the element that made the difference was industrialisation. By the
<u>1750</u>’s, the third world, comprising the manufactural champions of
India and China, was indeed on equal foot with the west; however, by
<u>1860</u>, when the first wave of globalization was just creeping on
the horizon, they had already fallen behind the European level, and by
<u>1914</u>, the industrialisation process in Europe was twenty-two
times more intensive than that in the third world.

It is in this sense that we can say <u>the first wave boosted the
industrialisation of the north and the de-industrialisation of the
south</u>. The opposite can be said for the second wave: between
<u>1950</u> and <u>1990,</u> we assisted the retreat of industrial
employment in northern countries because, starting from the
<u>1970</u>’s, <u>industrial producers began to relocate their
production in certain southern and cheaper areas</u>. This, together
with the oil shock in <u>1973</u>, contributed to the attenuation of the
income inequalities between the north and the south.

During the second wave of globalization, the overall volume of financial
flows and foreign investments had not yet reached the level of the first
wave. More importantly, the authors highlighted the <u>different nature
of the capital flow</u>: this second wave of globalization was
characterized by enormous short-term flows, driven by a <u>vehement,
unbeatable pace of information exchange and advances in technology</u>
rather than the long-term flows that marked the first wave.

During the first wave, long-term flows prevailed also because
information technology had improved thanks to the invention of the
telegraph and of the telephone, but was by far not that fast. In
addition, <u>long-term investments were favoured by the high costs of
transmitting knowledge</u>.

<u>It is interesting to figure out whether the author’s first statement</u>, according to which the volume
of financial flows and FDIs during the second wave had not reached the
level of the first one, <u>can actually still hold in the present
day</u>. Between <u>1996</u> and the Crisis of 2008, <u>foreign
investment became seven times as dynamic as general economic growth</u>,
therefore we could, with a great degree of certainty, claim that the
second wave has actually overtaken the financial flow and FDI levels of
the first wave of globalization. One of the reasons why is that the
controls which were imposed on capital movement in the <u>1930</u>’s
were lifted during the mid <u>1990</u>’s in a climate of neoliberal
euphoria.

<br>

## Trade, investment, migration and factor prices

As far as trade and investment are concerned, the authors state that,
during the first and second wave, transport costs diminished: while in
the first wave steam shipping and railroads were decisive, during the
second wave, the creation of the container system was crucial. The most
important factor of difference between the first and the second wave
remains, however, the <u>sharp fall of communication costs after
1975</u>, mainly thanks to the introduction of the Internet and other
faster communication means. To illustrate, the latter allowed the
<u>instantaneous movement of capital, the fall of transportation costs,
the organization of a worldwide supply chain in manufacture and the
dislocation of factories in countries of the south</u>.

In this way, during the second wave, from a mere raw material supplier,
the south also became the key manufacturer of the north, while the north
remained the manufacturer of the south. Regarding FDI’s, the authors
argued that, during the first wave, the north constituted the supply of
capital for the south; however, during the second wave, the dependence
of the south on northern FDIs diminished (comparison between data from
<u>1914</u> to <u>1996</u>): investments also began to flow among
southern countries. <u>This phenomenon has particularly become more
robust with the rise of China in recent years</u>.

In economics, the expression “factor prices”
refers to the <u>three main factors in the classical production
function</u>: land, capital and labour. As far as the Americas are
concerned (the US in particular), <u>land and capital goods</u>, such as
raw materials have <u>always been abundant, while labour supply has
always been quite short: wages have been consequently higher</u>. In
Europe and Asia, on the contrary, <u>land and raw materials have always
been very costly while workforce is still abundant and therefore badly
paid</u>.

This inverted situation constituted what we now define as <u>the
hallmark of the 1880-1914 period</u>: a massive flow of labour migration
from Europe and Asia to America. Furthermore, in the long run, the major
effect of the aforementioned phenomenon was the <u>convergence of factor
prices between the “old world”, where wages
increased and labour became less abundant, and the “new world”, where the wage level lowered as the labour
supply on the market became more abundant</u>. As a consequence,
inequality between labour owners and capital owners increased and
contributed to pressures for anti-immigration legislations in the late
<u>19<sup>th</sup></u> and early <u>20<sup>th</sup> century</u>, making the labour market in
the US more protectionist.

On the other hand, the inflow of cheap industrial goods into Europe
fostered certain anti-trade sentiments. As far as the second wave is
concerned, further convergence of factor prices was observed in the
<u>1960</u>s between Europe, Japan and North America. The authors argue
that, during this second period, trade had expanded rapidly, especially
the manufactured exports of emerging economies: <u>the dislocation of
factories to low-wage regions indeed created new income opportunities in
the global south and lessened the ones in the north, where labour saving
technologies</u> (factory automation, information technology) <u>have
reduced the demand for low-skilled workers in offices and factories</u>.

Under such conditions, neoliberal policies could triumph worldwide,
weakening the power of organised labour. Over the last decade however,
<u>migration flows have become again dramatic, mainly because of the
condition of many fugitives of wars and persecutions, but also because
of the gaps in factor prices</u>.

<br>

## Summing up similarities and differences

During the first wave of globalization, the international monetary
system had been strong, especially thanks to the creation of the gold
standard, which was extremely useful, and for this reason there was
little discussion of devaluation by the world’s major players before
<u>1914</u>.

On the other hand, during the second wave, the IMS has become more
volatile: for the late <u>20<sup>th</sup>-century</u> policymakers,
globalization’s most starling impact concerns the
management of exchange rate. Officials have indeed had to choose between
floating their exchange rate and joining a big monetary union (with its
loss of sovereignty).

As far as trade policies are concerned, during both waves, <u>free trade
doctrines had prevailed, even though protectionist measures did not
disappear in continental European countries and in the American labour
market</u>. In the <u>1800</u>’s, for instance, there was a solid
intellectual case for unilateral free trade. <u>The supremacy of the
free trade doctrine, however, did not hinder the development of modern
protectionism designed to promote development</u>. The result was <u>a
strong line of reasoning supporting temporary protection of
manufacturing as a means of promoting industrialisation</u>.

Today, the world trade system is viewed by almost all nations as an
<u>essential public good, a system that is worthy of support even for
purely nationalistic reasons</u>. With the exception of the extreme left
and right, protectionism is detested by policymakers and and economists
from around the globe and from across the political spectrum.


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 25: Social change in Europe, 1945-2000

Learning objectives:

1. Mid-20<sup>th</sup> century
2. The main periods of change
3. Changes in work, family and consumption
4. From class-society to individualism, urban spaces and welfare</u>

<br>

## Mid-20<sup>th</sup> century

The period from <u>1945</u> to <u>2000</u> was a long period of peace,
even if we consider the Yugoslav war and the Greek Civil War. It was
also a period of extraordinary social dynamism and economic growth. All
sectors of society were involved in change, and Europe saw the triumph
and the decline of Communism and the welfare state, the end of its
colonial era and its transition from a global metropolitan position to
one of the greatest centres of multipolar globalization.

The other premise Kaelble proposes is a sort of ‘snapshot’ of society
that Europe had left behind. What was mid-20<sup>th</sup> century Europe like? Here
is how the author describes it:

1.  Agricultural and other physically demanding work was prevalent
1.  Weight of agriculture in the economy was still strong
2.  Prevalent family type: monogamous, single-income, two children
3.  Still prevalent rural form of human settlement
4.  In industrial areas, class distinction was clearly visible
5.  Consumption model characterized by scarcity
6.  Consumption styles strongly local and regional, not international
7.  Every-day life under a local and regional horizon, linked to one place
8.  Immigration from former colonies, high birth rates, population
    growth
9.  Weak welfare estate

<br>

## The main periods of change

The author guides us through the main periods of change in a
chronological and a thematic way; together, they compose the picture of
his analysis:

<u>The postwar period (1945-1950)</u>

High unemployment rate, housing shortage, diseases, displacements,
hunger, black market

Marked distinctions of status and class

Social reforms, political reforms (democracy)

<u>Period of prosperity (1951-1972)</u>

Economy: high growth rates, real wages up, consumption, structural
change

Demography: workers’ immigration

Social policies: welfare state, social planning, spread of education

<u>Era of economic difficulties (1973-1988)</u>

1973 oil crisis, lower growth rates, periods of recession; structural
unemployment

New family models (singles, with child)

Birth decreases, zero population growth

Labor market reforms (“flexibility”)

Crisis of the welfare state

<u>Period of Change (1989-2000)</u>

Eastern Europe:

System changed in a brutally quick way

End to social security and full employment

From a scarcity model to one of abundance

Western Europe:

Increase in geographic mobility

New immigration flow from the East

Dismantling of the welfare state

Europe:

New European currency

Increasingly powerful EU every-day life of citizens

<br>

## Changes in work, family and consumption

<u>Work</u>

(1945-1980)

From manual to automated

Long-term working relationships

Increased complexity of tasks, greater division of labor

High unionisation of the workforce and of enterprises

Managerial capitalism and organised industrial relations

(1980-2000)

From automation to computerisation

The end of the “stable job”; flexibility, insecurity

Less organised industrial relations

Unemployment; diminishing trade union power

<u>Family</u>

Increasingly diversified family models

Growth of divorces; in 1950-1970, there were more independent women

1945-1970: baby boom, 1970-2000: falling birth rate

Extra-familial care of growing children, single, working mothers

New leisure activities: shopping, holidays

Street life replaced by machines and TV

Tendency to live in small urban apartments

Rural family also converges at the end of the “middle class” model

After 1989, the importance of family was re-evaluated; “grown-up babies”
stayed in their parents’ home, and the role of grandparents was also
reconsidered

<u>Consumption</u>

Beginning of mass-consumption in the use: 1920’s, in Western Europe:
1950’s, in the East: 1970’s

Internationalisation of styles and tastes

New social symbolic function

From indistinct to personalized

Opposition against standard styles

European mass-consumption has followed European styles (no
Americanisation)

(Eastern Europe, 1945-1990)

Centralised production and distribution to combat the shortage

<br>

## From class-society to individualism, urban spaces and welfare

<u>FROM CLASS SOCIETY TO INDIVIDUALISM</u>

(1945-1970)

<u>European West</u>

Disappearance of proletarian and bourgeois milieu, middling tendencies

Income convergence, sociability, weddings, tastes, lifestyles

Growth factors: income, welfare, real estate, education

Less social subdivision of urban spaces

<u>Eastern Europe</u>

“Brutal” disappearance of class society

Marginalisation of the independent bourgeoisie

Subordination of professionals and intellectuals

Destruction of traditional peasant condition

(1970-1990)

New values: small is beautiful, ecology, localism

Weakening of labor unions, churches, political parties, mass
organizations

(1990-2000)

New inequalities and exclusion mechanisms

Excluded young people; single mothers excluded; poor excluded

Excluded those who can not “appear”

<u>URBAN GROWTH AND MIGRATION</u>

Urban growth everywhere until 1970

After 1970: urban growth replaced by intensification; pedestrian zones,
public transport

Urban planning internationalised

European cities resemble each other more and more

Immigration from former colonies

Immigration from Eastern Europe

<u>THE GROWTH OF THE MODERN WELFARE STATE</u>

(1945-1975)

Minimum income in case of invalidity, old age or unemployment is every
citizens’ right

Eastern Europe: workplace guaranteed

(1975-2000)

The costs of welfare discussed as being “hardly bearable”

Eastern Europe: costs “hidden” welfare costs

High costs alert; gradual expenditure reduction envisaged (in the name
of “efficiency”)

Structural unemployment, “new poverty”

“Anti-corporatist” critique, dismantling of protection


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 26: from ‘Solid’ to ‘Liquid’ modernity

Learning objectives:

1. The rise and fall of labor
2. From marriage to cohabitation
3. From procrastination to immediate gratification
4. The “fluidification” of human relations</u>

<br>

## The rise and fall of labor

<u>Liquiefied Community (1750-1870)</u>

Pre-Industrial era: well-defined social relations

Pre-Industrial era: solidly organised community

Industrialisation uprooted workers from the means of subsistence

Industrialisation: driving force behind generalised market relations

Classical Economy: all wealth comes from “work”

Polarisation workers vs capitalists; rich nations vs poor nations

<u>Solid Modernity (1870-1970)</u>

After 1850, trend to overcome insecurity

An era of orderly, rational and organised society begins: solid
modernity

“Fordism” and standardisation symbolises solid modernity

The liaison between capital and labor is fortified by mutual dependence

Big companies and managerial capitalism

High degree of trade union organization; improving wages

The time horizon of heavy capitalism is long-term

Workers’ bond with one company whose lifespan exceeds their own

<u>Liquid Modernity (1970-…)</u>

All that was solid, becomes liquid

All that was long-term, becomes short-term

<br>

## From marriage to cohabitation

<u>Today’s uncertainty is of a completely new type</u>

Cooperation seems no longer useful to face the risks

Uncertainty is a formidable “individualising” force

Fears and anxieties are suffered in solitude

People establish weak ties with each other

<u>The capital has become geographically fluid</u>

Capital got rid of its dependence on labor, gaining freedom of movement

The success of a company is measured in annual dividend & stock values

Location is no longer considered important

National governments powerless in forcing the capital to remain

Consumers, not the producers at the centre of economic discourse

<u>Robert Reich, four social categories</u>

1.  Symbolic manipulators
2.  Educators and the social state officials
3.  Professional “personal services” like advertisers and retailers
4.  Routine workers “residual”

<u>The new globalized elite</u>

The space counts for little, command from distance

Revolutionised the vocabulary: surf, flows, etc.

Command a show of power, surveillance by seduction

“Those who control the airwaves dominate the world”

<br>

## From procrastination to immediate gratification

<u>The satisfaction of desire removed to an “elsewhere” place</u>

Procrastination predominant feature of modernity

It is the ethics of capital accumulation, and of work

Procrastination is not an ascetic principle, however

<u>Procrastination fuelled opposing tendencies</u>

Work appears as an end in itself, but actually is hedonism

Immediate and infinite consumption is the aim in the world of today

This disposition lacks critical reflection, continuity, tradition

<u>Human ties in a fluid world</u>

Uncertainty prevails over stability

Fear of the vulnerability of people’s bodies, person, property

<u>Where does this insecurity and vulnerability come from?</u>

“Structural” unemployment and permanent risk of job loss

No longer even the idea of long-lasting employment

No one can feel socially irreplaceable

Future not predictable, clouded, risky and potentially worse

Given the uncertainty, procrastination has lost its appeal

Fashions and “lifestyles” propagate and go at supersonic speeds

Every opportunity missed seems an opportunity lost

<br>

## The “fluidification” of human relations

<u>Human relations in liquid modernity</u>

If the future is not predictable, then it is necessary to keep oneself
reactive and flexible

Strong and long-lasting bonds become obstacles

Consequence: precarious labor contracts, few marriages, many divorces

Emotional ties often short-lived

Insecure people easily become intolerant, aggressive, suspicious

<u>The self-perpetuation of distrust</u>

Decreasing confidence in oneself, in others, in institutions, in
cooperation, in the “big ideas” and organizations

Distrust in politics

<u>Capital is globalizing, labor local</u>

Workers are subjected to the caprices of mysterious “investors” and
“shareholders”, against which “you can do nothing”


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 27: the revival of “Community”

Learning objectives:

1. Loss of control, the main source of contemporary fear
1. The revival of the community
1. A revival of the Nation
1. The dire price of “security”

<br>

## Loss of control, the main source of contemporary fear

In the previous unit, we learned how the people of our age face solitude
and uncertainty. This uncertainty about tomorrow is hardly bearable and
triggers fear, and on the collective level, also <u>the political sphere
has lost total control</u>. For Zygmund Bauman, the political sphere is
divorced from power (which transcends all political and national
boundaries while work is divorced form capital (a more localized
phenomenon). What can be done? He says that:

“No one is in control. That is the major source of contemporary fear.
(…) It seems that we are living on quicksand. (…) Precisely because this
fear is so poorly located that it is so frightening. The question is:
why is it so? Where does this absence of control come from? We are not
in control, no one seems to be in control. (…) There are various reasons
for this: one reason is the separation between power and politics. Power
is the ability to get things done, and politics is the ability to choose
which things to get done. Now, both abilities were, until quite
recently, united in one place called nation-state. (…) Both sides of the
political spectrum agreed on one point: if our concept of what is to be
done wins, then we know who will do it, because the State has the power
to do it. (…) This is no longer the case. (…) There is a great gap
between the ability to do things and the ability to coerce the powerful
agencies to do what needs to be done.

<br>

## The revival of the community

The future offers no solutions to this problem (mentioned in Part 1), so
most of us tend to look to the past for answers. Wasn’t there a better
world before it all came down in ruins? Where there was a community,
cemented by a sense of solidarity in which one cared for the other?

There is a nostalgic desire for community. This reborn communitarianism
<u>responds to the liquefaction of society and the uncertainties it
generates</u>. Communitarianism promises to heal the wound, which is why
its gospel can count on a large audience.

According to Bauman, present-day neo-communitarianists criticized
liberalism because:

The individual human cannot be made responsible for what goes wrong in
society

The individual human cannot bear the weight of insecurity alone

We should return to communities that are established beyond individual
choice

But this return to ‘community’, according to Bauman, is fake:

“In so far as they need to be defended to survive and they need to
appeal to their own members to secure that survival by their individual
choices and take for that survival by individual responsibility — all
communities are postulated; projects rather than realities, something
that comes after, not before the individual choice. The community ‘as
seen in communitarian paintings’ would be tangible enough to be
invisible and to afford silence; but then communitarians won’t paint its
likeness, let alone exhibit them. This is the inner paradox of
communitarianism.”

This return is fake because the pre-established and well-established
*<span lang="de">Gemeinschaft</span>* is not achievable. If there was an identity, nobody would
speak of identity, and if there was an authenticity, nobody would speak
of it, either, since there wouldn’t be anything to distinguish it from;
<u>the same goes for community, something which exists because of the
lack of something</u>.

To conjure it into existence, communitarians must appeal to individual
choice/responsibility. Our existential desire for certainty and security
morphs into the demonization of the Other/who is external. The concept
of “community” is inherently exclusivist, directed against the Other; an
inclusive community is a contradiction in terms of meaning.

<br>

## A revival of the Nation

Community projects may have a mobilizing effect for cultural and
political movements (such as during elections), but they tend to be
unrealistic and utopian when it comes to the possibility of
alternatives.

Still, there is one success story: the only success story of community
in modern times is the Nation/the Nation-State. Its success was due to
ethnic homologation and loyalty to the ethnic principle. Establishing
ethnicity as a form of human unity had the advantage of apparently
“naturalising” history and culture. The feeling of belonging was reduced
to the individual’s choice of accepting his own nature or to betray it.

Historically, the Nation-State achieved this at the cost of ethnic
homologation and suppressing other communities; there is no other form
of statehood that extinguished so many communities. <u>This is a
typically exclusive model, and this is why net-communitarians can easily
sustain and turn out to be the promoters of renewed waves of
nationalism, as we have indeed seen in various countries</u>. It is true
that there may be nationalisms that are aggressive (and also some that
are not), but regarding Maurizio Viroli’s thesis on “Good Patriotism and
Bad Nationalism”, Bauman makes an ironic comment saying:

“Nationalism is the patriotism you don’t like or you’re supposed to not
like, whereas patriotism is the nationalism you like and you’re supposed
to like.”

Thus, <u>Nationalism and Patriotism are fundamentally the same</u>. Both
are based on exclusion, even if Patriotism seems nice and friendly, and
both traced boundaries with which they then perpetuated the difference
between Us (<u>minimization of internal differences</u>) and the Others
(<u>exaggeration of external differences</u>). Bauman would prefer what
he calls the “Republican model of the Polis”:
1.  Always starts from diversity and gains unity through confrontation,
    debate, negotiation, compromise and the recognition of others’
    freedoms
1.  Is an inclusive model

But in a world of insecure and vulnerable people which model will win?
<u>The model of Nation will win, which is based purely on national
ethnic homogeneity.</u>

<br>

## The dire price of “security”

<u>When the national community could gain power again under the control
of politics is a matter of heated political debate</u>. Bauman is quite
sceptical; after concluding his considerations regarding community as it
is dreamt of today, he again points out its mythical and metaphorical
character, far from offering a realistic solution to our present fears
and vulnerabilities. He writes:

“The vision of community, let me repeat, is that of an island of homely
and cosy tranquillity in a sea of turbulence and inhospitality. It
tempts and seduces, prompting the admirers to refrain from looking too
closely, since the eventuality of ruling the waves and taming the sea
has already been deleted from the agenda as a proposition both suspect
and unrealistic. Being the only shelter offers the vision an added
value, and that value goes on being added to as the stock exchange where
other life values are traded grows ever more capricious and
unpredictable.”

So at the end, Bauman argues the communitarian communities look more
like prisons and not like places of freedom. To root for universal
freedom could increase the level of security for all, but
neo-communitarians stand firmly by their decision of <u>giving up their
freedom for additional security</u>. Unfortunately, this added value
might not be worth it and is unpredictable like everything else.

For this very reason, <u>many prefer focusing their attention on the
appearance and health of their own body, which has become the last
refuge and sanctuary, so it must be preserved</u>. The border between
the body and the outside world has become the most closely-watched;
however, our body cannot overcome this extreme insecurity and
uncertainty. Thus, <u>the loneliness of the body and the solitude of the
community are the most meaningful results of the new liquid society</u>.

However, in the present pages, Bauman describes power as it appears:
liquid, technical, ephemeral, depersonalized. Here, politics has no
chance of building up control again it. In fact, <u>it is not impossible
to understand who the really powerful men and women are and who helps
them preserve their privilege</u>. The concrete face of power lies
behind a smokescreen, and it is also true that politics is not condemned
to stay important. Organisation can yield solitude, and change is
therefore possible. The sea can be tamed, and those who feel
uncomfortable with the fake solutions proposed above, are not condemned
to a pessimistic outlook.


<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 28: Equality and hierarchy in a global society

Learning objectives:

1. European spaces
1. Human races
1. World cultures
1. Global rights

General propositions

A pressing question comes to mind when we speak of equality: is the
coexistence between the western ideal of universal equality among all
human beings (and the obsessive western practices of partition and
discrimination since the fifteenth century) a historical paradox or a
contradiction?

From a western philosophical standpoint, we can say that this is true,
while from a non-western philosophical standpoint, it is neither. The
West has always been in possession of the responsibilities for
“civilization”, “humanity”, “progress” and “innate rights”. <u>According
to the West, moral goodness belongs only to those who accept the
universality of universalism, who take the claim that “all men are born
equally” seriously</u>.

So, according to this point of view (shared by many philosophers), a
moral person could not defend slavery and oppression. <u>The institution
of slavery by those who believe in the equality of men is
philosophically paradoxical and morally hypocritical</u>. However, for
the French philosopher Étienne Balibar, equality and hierarchy are not
just at odds, but they have a dialectical relationship. <u>Both
universalism and hierarchical partition each contain the other as a
necessary condition of their own discursive construction</u>. This also
leads to a development: you cannot make the statement that “all men are
born equal” without also claiming that all men are not yet equal. For a
Westerner, the dialectical solution sounds more convincing because it
has several advantages:

1.  It doesn’t put into question the main strands of Western philosophy

<!-- -->

1.  It allows the criticism of the West’s own past by outlining the
    hypocrisy of what past individuals claimed were their own principle

2.  It allows to keep the whole question within the Western historical
    master narrative, according to which some people are not yet free
    (as they deserve) as the people in the West, who should ‘help them’
    become free and equal

An example of this western paradox is the first president of the United
States, Thomas Jefferson, who claimed that:

“We hold these truths to be self-evident; that all men are created
equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain undeniable
rights; that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness.”

The contradiction within Jefferson’s conundrum is that:

He owned more than 600 African-American slaves throughout his adult life

With his Monticello plantation, he was the second-largest slaveholder in
Albermarle County

While serving as president (1801-1809), he brought slaves from
Monticello to work at the White House

At the end of his life, he still owned at least 130 slaves (men, women
and children)

All of this, according to a non-western philosophical standpoint, is all
a Western-established hegemony, be that through oppression or the
criticism of oppression. In non-Western eyes, Western
<u>universalism</u> doesn’t necessarily appear to be universal to begin
with, but <u>is a straightforward partisan claim for hegemony and power
that is not at all contradictory</u>.

Thus, for a non-Western, moral goodness may not belong to those who
claim universality of universalism. We should understand that such a
view can also exist and claim some historical evidence to corroborate
it. <u>Our moral indignation will not escape from the self-referential
loops of justification of Western philosophy of history</u>.

<br>

## European spaces

Regarding the partition of spaces, we can be brief, as we have covered
this subject in the past.

As Condorcet claimed, the European nations’ universal mission was a
European mission. This is why we can say that <u>universal geography was
re-classified according to European partition practices</u>. European
philosophy of history was able to assign a hierarchy to regions all over
the globe according to parameters of progress. It enabled the
reaffirmation (albeit secularized version) of colonial occupation.
<u>The desire to trace a boundary between Europe and Asia, despite the
geophysical objectivity Europe had always used for their scientific
projects, was ‘proof’ of such.</u>

In their self-perception, Europeans crossed the boundaries of Europe
conquering ‘empty’ backward territories where time stood still. Once
again, they did not do so out of selfish will of exploitation, but also
because of the ‘weight’ of the ‘humanitarian mission’ that burdened
their shoulders.

But also the European spaces themselves have been re-classified. Since
the <u>17<sup>th</sup> century</u>, they described a new downward slope along the
mental axis of progress and civilization. The alleged ‘inability’ of the
Levantine areas and the ex-Byzantine rule to establish a more ‘rational’
economic and administrative organization was matched with a ‘brutal and
uncivil’ nature of the inhabitants.

According to George Sandies, who was travelling in the Ottoman Empire in
the early <u>16<sup>th</sup> century</u>, the Ottomans had erased former Greek and
Christian civility. On the other hand, for Sir Henry Plumb, who traveled
to the Turkish balkans, claimed that the Turkish were the ‘only modern
people of the area’, whereas the Christian slavs were the savage people
under their rule. The roles were switched. Plumb also maintained that:

“To our north-west parts of the world, no people should be no worse or
strange of behavior than those of the south-east. Especially in the
most remote places, there are many mountaineers and outlaws like the
wild Irish.”

The spacial axes, therefore, assumed a metaphorical value. They stood
for the position of the inhabitants on the time axis of progress. The
main axes that were formed were the figure of <u>backwards Eastern
Europe in the 18<sup>th</sup> century, backwards South-Eastern Europe (the balkans)
in the 19<sup>th</sup> century and the North-South divide in the late 19<sup>th</sup>
century/early 29<sup>th</sup> century</u>.

For centuries, the European South was the beacon of wealth, beauty and
civilization, and now it had become a place of backwardness that was
lagging behind in the process of modernization.

<br>

## Human races

The Dominican Bartolomè de las Casas is one of the most famous
historical figures for his attacks on slavery and extinction to which
the Spaniards had subjected the Indians:

“The natives are capable of Morality or Goodness and very apt to receive
the principles of Catholic Religion; nor are they averse to Civility and
good Manners…, I myself have heard the Spaniards themselves (who dare
not assume the Confidence to deny the good Nature in them) declare, that
there was nothing wanting in them for the acquisition of eternal grace,
but the sole Knowledge and Understanding of the Deity….”

Thanks to his continuous denunciation and his numerous writings
addressed to the King, the Indians were freed in <u>1542</u>. But a need
for labour in the colonies led De Las Casas to advise the King to bring
the African population there (Spain and Portugal were already using them
in their sugar plantations). Why not extend this to the Caribbeans?

The fate of the Africans was cruel, as <u>they were believed incapable
of civility and good manners.</u> The Western view on ‘negro’ population
was characterized by boundless arrogance; these populations tended to be
disdainfully compared to the animal kingdom so as to be excluded by some
authors from any possibility of reaching full humanity.

It was in this way that black skin became an inescapable condition of
inferiority, something that needed to be explained separately. According
to Bernier, the author of the first radically racist book:

“Africans are black due to a peculiar texture of their bodies. (…) Their
hair is a wool, like that of our dogs.”

Almost a century later, the respected father of cosmopolitism, Kant,
after scientifically explaining “why all negroes stink” (because of
“humid climate” and the fact that they are “strong, fleshy, agile”, but
also “lazy, indolent”), underlined that “besides all this, humid warmth
generally promotes the strong growth of animals”.

These texts easily suggest that, for Westerners, Africans were stuck in
the transition period from animal to human. A little later, Hume wrote:

“I am apt to suspect the negroes to be naturally inferior to the whites.
There scarcely ever was a civilized nation of that complexion, nor even
any individual eminent either in action or speculation. No ingenious
manufactures amongst them, no arts, no sciences.”

The racism in this last statement lies in the quote “uncivilized man”;
it all depends on the Western fantasy regarding the difference between
man and beast and the meaning of history. This is not biology, but
racist taxonomy.

Racism regarding black people was motivated by colonialism and slavery,
but we already saw the taxonomy of spaces, which of course stands for
the population that inhabits these spaces; this means that there are
other types of racism. The so-called Orientalism explains (with racist
arguments) why formally leading civilizations, like the Chinese or the
Arabs, are now decaying. In Italy, the anthropologist Alfredo Niceforo
explains that different races inhabit the North of Italy and the South
of Italy. The Southern race is more spontaneous, emotional and
instinctive, almost ‘animal-like’ and inferior. What are they inferior
in? As Niceforo explains, they are ‘inferior’ in the capability to build
a modern industrial society. <u>Racism is not about any intrinsic bodily
inferiority; the body may only be part of the ‘explanation’ why a group
of people is less capable of bearing the torch of civilization</u>.

Anti-semitism is a special branch of Western racism because it developed
gradually. Still, if we follow Adolf Hitler’s explanation of why he
became an anti-semite, we can recognise that <u>the eschatological and
apocalyptic view of history is central there as well</u>. According to
his account, Hitler had initially ‘fell’ for the deceitful camouflage of
Jews as Western people, but then he had his ‘awakening’:

“I suddenly came across a man with black curls dressed in a long caftan.
My first thought was: is that a Jew? … The smell of these caftan-wearers
made me feel nauseous.”

So he now knew that an alien oriental race was in the midst of
Westerners, even if they were pretending to be like them. In Hitler’s
view, this wasn’t an inferior race, which was a big problem, but rather
an ‘anti-Christ’:

“Should the Jew triumph over the peoples of the world, the planet will
drive through the ether once again empty of human life. Eternal Nature
takes inexorable revenge for the violation of her order.”

According to this quote, the Jews conspire for the conquest of the world
to destroy humanity (<u>the salvation of humanity is a
Western/Christian/European/German duty</u>). This anti-semitism also
took a religious turn:

“I believe that I act today in accordance with the will of the Almighty
Creator: in standing guard against the Jew, I am defending the Lord’s
work.”

<br>

## World cultures

After the Shoah, <u>racism became a taboo</u>.

In <u>1950</u>, the UNESCO (the leader of which, Julian Haxley, had been
a strong promoter of eugenics) recommended to speak of ‘ethnic groups’
when, literally, speaking of race. At the same time, positivistic
anthropology was taken over by cultural anthropology; measuring scalps
became less attractive than participant observation of customs and
habits or ‘primitive’ native peoples. Not even the most fanatic scalp
measurers forgot to insert a chapter on climate on customs, climate and
psychology.

To call ‘differences’ ‘racial differences’ has become a taboo; but
<u>ethnicity and culture are the expressions that have taken the place
of ‘race’</u>. They are not the same, but they serve the same purpose.
They also distinguish between backward ethnicities and advanced
cultures. Why, in the endless flood of multicultural posters, is there
always a white hand joining a black hand? <u>If culture is really so
diverse, why is there an obsession with skin colour</u>? Cultural
anthropology has all but freed itself of bodily references.

A good example of the passage from racism to cultural anthropology is
Dr. Carlo Levi’s participant observation of the local peasant population
of Southern Italy during political confinement:

“Opaque eyes and possessed by animal spirits and precocious maturity.
They live in a desolate land, motionless and beyond history and
progressive reason.”

This is a typical colonial description of an ‘exotic’ population. How
can culture possibly take the role that race had? There are also other
philosophical distinctions: the Socratic fùsis’ division into body and
soul. At a certain point, the outer world became nature as opposed to
the human and divine sphere. <u>So we see the idea emerge that the human
animal, as it is gifted to go beyond nature, has the opportunity to
leave its best traits behind. The human species develops its full
humanity.</u> But what does culture have to do with all this?

In Latin, ‘culture’ meant individual education. It was only during the
Enlightenment that it was re-invented as a word referring to customs and
beliefs, such as with Voltaire. For Immanuel Kant, culture was the place
of human reason and the way Nature achieves its ultimate end. This also
makes it easier to understand why the passage from race to culture
wasn’t such a huge step. <u>The culture cage is inescapable, just like a
second membrane. This is the way that human difference is explained, and
it becomes ‘diversity’</u>.

<br>

## Global rights

Why did universal difference become ‘diversity’? Why should certain
things be more important than others? Why should cultural friendship
always be represented by appearance? There are many who defend the
‘superior, leading culture’, who could not care less about the
discrimination of women, who now suddenly discover Western superiority
through granting rights to women. How is it that Western culture is on
the ‘good side’ of history? Evidently, there is ‘good’ and ‘bad’
diversity.

Statements such as ‘all men are born equal’ are present in Western
writings. Toussaint Louverture, the Haitian general and the most
prominent leader of the Haitian Revolution in <u>1791</u>, was
influenced by Enlightenment philosophers; yet, he had to lead the
revolution against France, as the revolutionaries sitting in the
National Assembly did not abolish slavery in the colonies. A similar
phenomenon is also present in the <u>20<sup>th</sup> century</u>, such as the fight
for being recognised as a ‘Nation’ (quote by Edwin Thumboo):

“Freedom from colonial rule is its repossession as national space.”

Repossession of what, though? <u>Leaving the colonial age behind was
thought to be possible through rediscovering an authentic dimension,
something lost in the past</u>. But such stances often were also
intellectually legitimised by Western philosophy, as we find a reference
to this in Heidegger’s “Lebensvollzug”:

“In everydayness, we find the recurrence of a past and a primal sense of
grasping the world as our own.”

So any authenticity has to be reinvented, because <u>language and
semantics have also been colonised</u>. There are no words left, if not
the colonisers’ words to describe the pre-colonial being of a population
they had conquered in the past. Of course, <u>the alleged return to
tradition is part of the post-colonial narrative, and was used to
legitimise the new political élites. It is also a pretext for corrupt
Third-World élites, who hide behind “community” and “authenticity”
discourses to oppose the human rights of their peoples</u>.

Mahmood Mamdani does not deny this phenomenon, but also says that:

“…the self-righteousness and intolerance of the rights movement is its
tendency to dismiss every local cultural assertion as masking a defence
of privilege and inequality at the expense of the individual rights;
they are concerned for the lack of local equality, but blind to global
privilege.”

This is an inescapable paradox. There is an authentic dimension beyond
colonisation that is unattainable.

Human rights are inalienable, because that individual is inherently a
human being. They are applicable everywhere at any time, because they
are universal. In recent times, there have been some debates around the
concept of human rights and their universal validity. <u>Some
non-Western governors have expressed their view that the Western
definition of human rights does not always apply to their country, as
they have different traditions</u>. Why violate their own traditions?

To escape this dilemma, Ulrich Beck proposed that human rights be seen
in their context, but that this does not mean they can be violated:

“Contextual universalism does not oblige anyone, in the name of some
misguided relativism, to accept human rights violations in other
cultures and countries. (…) It asks: What conceptions of human rights,
and what human rights groups, are there in the country where human
rights are being grossly violated? How do they judge what is happening
in their country, from their point of view and with their knowledge of
human rights?”

Let us now look at the Maori word, ‘mana’:

1.  Legal, binding, authoritative

<!-- -->

1.  Prestige, spiritual power, charisma

2.  Jurisdiction, freedom

<u>Mana is a foundation of the Polynesian worldview, a spiritual quality
with a supernatural origin and a sacred, impersonal force that pervades
our world</u>. From a Polynesian point of view, Mana is a general
principle of life, and is a sort of world description and an expression
of how the world should work. For that reason, there are protests where
Maoris protest that Mana is violated. Why not substitute Beck’s quote
with Mana?:

“Contextual universalism does not oblige anyone, in the name of some
misguided relativism, to accept Mana violations in other cultures and
countries. (…) It asks: What conceptions of Mana, and what Mana groups,
are there in the country where Mana is being grossly violated? How do
they judge what is happening in their country, from their point of view
and with their knowledge of Mana?”

Can we imagine Mana groups in America or in Germany? Can we imagine the
US Congress implementing Mana in their own country? <u>Human rights are
universal, Mana is not. The fundamental difference is that the Maori
never claimed Mana to be universal.</u>

At any rate, it is hard to substantiate human rights as a concrete
right, says Costas Douzinas. It is hard if the State doesn’t enforce
these rights. <u>It is hard because ‘bare’ humanity does not offer
protection for refugees, undocumented immigrants, and imprisoned
suspects of terrorism</u>. Despite suggesting an egalitarian reference
to every single member of the species, human rights, however, do
“classify people on a spectrum between the fully human, the lesser human
and the inhuman”. If you are part of a group which has been demonised in
the press, you will have no human rights and no human rights group will
look after you.

This is not the only aspect where ideology comes in. Noam Chomsky
writes:

“The West tends to equate human rights exclusively with personal
freedom, and not with the broader and more complex conception found in
the International Bill of Rights (1948).”

Because in the articles 22-27, this declaration:

“Sanctioned economic and social rights, such as the right to a standard
of living adequate for the health and well-being, the social rights of
workers, protection from unemployment, food, clothing, housing and
medical care.”

But has any sanctions regime ever been erected for the violation of
these human rights? Was there ever a ‘humanitarian war’ declared for
rising unemployment in a country? <u>In our Western understanding, these
are matters of market economy, and thus their enforcement is near
impossible</u>.

At first glance, this seems to reflect the history of ‘Supranational
law’ (<u>at its beginnings, was underwritten by a liberal
cosmopolitanism that postulated ‘free individuals’ as the objective of
this law</u>); however, it is admittedly true that a more complex set of
motives govern the more recent evolution of Supranational law and
International law (especially after WWII).

In <u>1948</u>, social rights were advocated as ‘rights of citizenship’,
and so it was easy to also claim these as human rights. There is an
attempt at Supranational law enforcement, as International Criminal Law
Courts have been erected, but it should be noted that <u>the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 came on the heels of the Nuremberg
Trials against the crimes of the Nazi regime, which established that
‘war of aggression is the supreme international crime’</u>.

Seen from a hierarchy of imputation brought forth against the Nazi
leaders, it was not the Shoah or war crimes or genocide which were all
brought forth in the trials, but they were seen as a part of the supreme
crime, which is war in itself. This is the violation of sovereignty of
another State; this shows that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
is not a Supranational law, but it is International law. This means that
<u>sovereign states adopted it so as to respect their sovereignty,
besides, perhaps, the measures of enforcement that the UN Security
Council might adopt</u>. It is again Daniel Kovalik who observes that:

“The logic of the very founders of International law, including
International Human Rights law, was that, to preserve human rights, the
primary task of nations is to ensure peace and to prevent war which,
inevitably, leads to a massive violation of human rights.”

From the history of International Human Rights, <u>the sovereign state
is seen as the only legally entitled actor to make human rights’ respect
their priority</u>. Only peaceful means that do not violate the
sovereignty of that State can be legitimately used from the outside to
enforce the respect of International law and Human Rights. <u>This is a
fundamental aspect, whereas in the present decades we have assisted the
growth of a Human Rights industry that is based on another logic</u>.

NGO’s (which, in part, are not even non-governmental because they
heavily depend on public funding) and other politically-connected
organizations look after social protection, education, human rights and
women’s rights, but they also <u>heavily interfere with the internal
political situation of a country and have supported ‘colour revolutions’
that meddle with the political process in the hosting society</u>. Some
state-dependent NGO’s have even called for economic sanctions that wound
the civilian population and violate their human rights (food rations,
etc.). This is certainly not inside the commandments of International
law.

In the euphoria of post-Soviet US-dominated world, human rights became
weaponised, and R2P has become an official theory; it means ‘Right to
Protect’, and it claims that:

“If governments will not be willing or able to safeguard their citizens
against the threat of atrocities, the world must respond.”

In this way, the war in Afghanistan could also become a good thing for
the defence of women’s rights. Laura Bush claims:

“We continue to speak out on behalf of women and children, especially
girls, who, for seven years, have been denied their basic human rights
of health and education. Thanks to the efforts of the international
community, the days of oppression and terror by the Taliban are becoming
a memory.”

Since <u>1979</u>, the US and their allies would send money and weapons
to Afghanistan for ‘freedom fighters’, who then later burned down girls’
schools. This absurd situation of power-politics shows us the absurdity
of R2P and the classification of human rights through Western lens.

<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>

# Lecture 29: Race, culture, multiculturalism: hierarchies among ‘equals'

Learning objectives:

1. The contours of a multicultural crisis
1. Biological and cultural theories of human difference
1. Difference and diversity
1. ‘Bad’ diversities in the neoliberal era

<br>

## The contours of a multicultural crisis

Alana Lentin's and Gavan Titley's book titled <cite>The crises of multiculturalism</cite> addresses the issue of how <u>multiculturalism has been sentenced to death because of its futile efforts in opposing the racism that is ever-rising in Europe today</u>. Their arguments unfold in six chapters which aim to unpack the recited truths and the neoliberal fallacies of multiculturalism and the ever increasing conditions for integration.

The first chapter begins by introducing the sculpture of Entropa, an
artwork commissioned by the Czech government to inaugurate its
presidency as chancellor of the European Union in <u>2009</u> and
installed at the headquarters of the Council in Brussels. The name of
the sculpture is actually a conjunction between the terms ‘Europe’ and
‘entropy’. Looking more closely at Entropa, we can notice some monks who
erect a flag for gay rights in Poland, some minarets which rise from the
Netherlands’ sea, a lego sculpture resembling the
face of the muslim prophet Mohammad, etc.

The core statement in this chapter is that <u>multiculturalism has
failed and imploded</u>; indeed <u>it is no longer race, but culture
that precludes integration</u>, because it is crucial in hiding racism.
The debate on multiculturalism has actually become the discursive space
and playground within which the contemporary politics of race find their
expression and vindication. According to Lentin and Titley, <u>various
factors contributed to deliver multiculturalism’s
coup de grâce</u>:

1.  Liberals convinced of the weakness of postmodern cultural relativism
1.  Nationalists threatened by the unassimilable
2.  Progressive intellectuals for whom liberal multiculturalism weakens
    leftist critiques of class power relations
3.  Race relations professionals refashioning diversity and integration
    as the new paradigms of their daily craft

Moreover, also partial and erroneous visions of multiculturalism and
racism have given their contribution to the delegitimisation of
multiculturalism. As Michel de Certeau claimed, <u>society has become
full of recited truths in at least three ways: it is defined by stories,
by citations of stories and by the interminable recitation of
stories</u>.

<br>

## Biological and cultural theories of human difference

One of the major recited truths is that <u>race does not exist any longer</u>, allowing culture a new way of dividing and ordering people. <u>By replacing race with culture, we would indeed be able to attribute everything to culture without any fear of racism</u>: to speak of backward and primitive cultures is acceptable, while to say this about races was once racist. According to the British historian Paul Gilroy, race has indeed become a taboo subject, but it still exists and remains powerful precisely because it supplies a foundational understandings of natural hierarchy on which a host of other supplementary social and political conflicts have come to rely.

The authors of the book underline the fact that <u>the power of a racial grammar rests on the consensus of being post-race, where race is resiliently understood solely in terms of what has been rejected: the narrow and selective terms of false biology and phenotypical classification</u>.

Ergo, <u>complaining on cultural difference is not considered racist and this leads to the scarcely credible contention that the lack of an explicit racist political platform evidences the absence of racist politics in Europe</u>.

Today’s racist policies pose themselves precisely
within cultural modules, by rejecting multicultural excesses, often
referring to stereotypical groups of others, accused of having had every
chance to integrate but refused. <u>These discourses can be inserted
into a spectrum from hard and soft versions of a clash of civilizations
logic, in which to “Western culture” some form of
threat arises from non-Westerners in their midst</u>. Especially on the
right political spectrum, we can notice that the representation of
immigration is expressed as a conspiracy or subversion which is
perpetrated by some sort of aliens, resembling historical models of
racism.

At present, both in Europe and in the western world, <u>the issue of the radicalisation and “racialisation” of islam has become particularly discussed</u>. According to historian Edward Said, the racialisation of islam draws on the assumption that <u>it can be characterized limitlessly by means of a handful of reckless general and repeatedly deployed clichés</u>. This discourse has been particularly boosted by the events of <u>9/11</u>, after which the war on terror has turned the old anti-racist slogan “we are over here because you were over there” into a neocolonial justification:
“we are over there because you are over here”.

Moreover, similarly to “the Jew” of the
<u>1920s-1930s</u>, “the Muslim” <u>has become a figure of fluid transnationality and potential disloyalty, neither entirely alien but alienating and dis-integrated, fusing the past failures of multiculturalism with the current anxieties of immigration politics</u>.

<br>

## Difference and diversity

The fact that human beings are different seems almost trivial; the concept of differences between human groups is instead more important for political purposes. <u>Differences between population groups are indeed ignored or exalted according to precise political aims</u>.

At this point, the differentiation between “difference” and “diversity” is crucial. Lentin and Titley agree that <u>the differences between individuals are transformed into diversities between groups by political discourse</u>. In this sense, diversities are politicised and collectivised and stereotypical differences, which come to form a sort of identity.

It goes without saying that such diversities/identities can hardly live
together peacefully and without creating huge divergence of behavior.
The solutions in this case are normally two: <u>the minority can accept
to be assimilated by the majority, or the conflict results
inevitable</u>.

<br>

## ‘Bad’ diversities in the neoliberal era

As far as neoliberalism is concerned, the authors claim that it manages to privatise racism, that is, to be silenced or made invisible. Neoliberalism <u>does not indeed invest ideologically in racism, because open discrimination would undermine the fundaments of universalism</u>.   
De facto, racialised populations are disciplined, but also controlled, while being described in terms, for example, of civil rights they do not respect. In this way good and bad diversities can be established.

To illustrate, diversities like the headscarf, are considered bad, since they express the problem of wrong freedom or unfreedom which links the Arab states.
