**Summary&nbsp;**

The Meditator reflects that he has often found himself to be mistaken
with regard to matters that he formerly thought were certain, and
resolves to sweep away all his pre-conceptions, rebuilding his knowledge
from the ground up, and accepting as true only those claims which are
absolutely certain. All he had previously thought he knew came to him
through the senses. Through a process of methodological doubt, he
withdraws completely from the senses. At any moment he could be
dreaming, or his senses could be deceived either by God or by some evil
demon, so he concludes that he cannot trust his senses about
anything.&nbsp;

Ultimately, however, he realizes that he cannot doubt his own existence.
In order to doubt or to think, there must be someone doing the doubting
or thinking. Deceived as he may be about other things, he cannot help
but conclude that he exists. Since his existence follows from the fact
that he is thinking, he concludes that he knows at least that he is a
thing that thinks. He further reasons that he comes to know this fact by
means of his intellect, and that the mind is far better known to him
than the body.&nbsp;

The Meditator\'s certainty as to his own existence comes through a clear
and distinct perception. He wonders what else he might be able to know
by means of this sure method. In order to be certain that his clear and
distinct perceptions are indubitable, however, he first needs to assure
himself that God exists and is not deceiving him. He reasons that the
idea of God in his mind cannot be created by him since it is far more
perfect than he is. Only a being as perfect as God could cause an idea
so perfect. Thus, the Meditator concludes, God does exist. And because
he is perfect, he would not deceive the Meditator about anything. Error
arises not because the Meditator is deceived but because the will often
passes judgment on matters that the limited intellect does not
understand clearly and distinctly.&nbsp;

Secure in the knowledge that his clear and distinct perceptions are
guaranteed by God, the Meditator investigates material things. He
clearly and distinctly perceives that the primary attribute of body is
extension and that the primary qualities of body are size, shape,
breadth, etc. He also derives a second proof for the existence of God
from the fact that, while bodies are essentially extended, God is
essentially existent. A God that does not exist is as inconceivable as a
body that is not extended.&nbsp;

Because the essence of body is extension and the essence of mind is
thought, the Meditator concludes that the two are completely distinct.
He decides also that while he can clearly and distinctly perceive the
primary qualities of material things, he has only a confused and obscure
perception of secondary qualities. This is because the senses are meant
to help him get around in the world, not to lead him to the truth.

**Context&nbsp;**

Ren&eacute; Descartes (1596 - 1650) was born near Tours, in France, and
was educated for nine years at a Jesuit college. After graduating with a
law degree from Poitiers at the age of twenty-two, he traveled about
Europe, developing a passion for mathematics and philosophy. He spent
most of his life after 1628 in Holland, and published in philosophy,
physics, mathematics, and other sciences. In mathematics, he invented
analytic geometry and the coordinate system that bears his name
(\"Cartesian\"). He also prepared some significant works in physics,
which he withdrew from publication upon discovering that his
contemporary, Galileo, had been condemned by the Inquisition for
teaching that the earth rotates around the sun, a theory that Descartes
also supported. His great achievement, however, is
the&nbsp;*Meditations,*&nbsp;published in 1641, and generally considered
the starting point for modern Western philosophy. It was widely read and
discussed even in Descartes\' day. In 1649, Descartes accepted an
appointment as tutor for Queen Christina of Sweden. She demanded that
her lessons take place at five o\'clock in the morning, and the strain
of rising early coupled with the unbearable cold of Sweden gave
Descartes pneumonia and killed him within a year.&nbsp;

Descartes was writing at a time when a new physics was being developed
by Galileo and others. This new physics could be understood as a
mathematization of nature. Galileo and others began understanding the
processes of movement and change in the universe as being formalized in
a small number of mathematical relationships. This led to an
understanding of the universe as being governed by a very few, simple,
abstract, mathematical principles. The metaphysics developed in
the&nbsp;*Meditations*&nbsp;is meant to serve as an underpinning for the
new physics being developed at the time. Descartes saw his reason-based
and mathematically-inclined metaphysics as providing all the foundations
necessary to develop his own physical principles.&nbsp;

Descartes was also writing at a time when Catholic philosophy inherited
from Aristotle had a tremendous influence. Descartes himself was raised
in the Jesuit tradition, and the&nbsp;*Meditations*&nbsp;in many ways
resemble St. Ignatius of Loyola\'s&nbsp;*Spiritual Exercises.*&nbsp;Both
are framed in a meditational form meant to span six days\' meditation.
Descartes also imitates Loyola\'s three stages of purgation (skeptical
doubt), illumination (proof of the existence of the self, of God), and
union (linking this knowledge to the material world). In imitating
Loyola\'s style, and opening the&nbsp;*Meditations*&nbsp;with a very
Aristotelian outlook, Descartes hoped to seduce the conservative
thinkers of his day into following his line of reasoning. After having
witnessed Galileo\'s fate, he had every reason to be cautious. This
method also makes Descartes far more accessible to the largely Jesuit
audience that he is addressing.

**Overall Analysis and Themes&nbsp;**

The&nbsp;*Meditations*&nbsp;are generally considered the starting point
of modern Western philosophy, and with good reason. In this one brief
text, Descartes turns many Aristotelian doctrines upside down and frames
many of the questions that are still being debated in philosophy today.
Among other things, Descartes breaks down the Aristotelian notion that
all knowledge comes via the senses and that mental states must in some
way resemble what they are about. In so doing, he develops an entirely
new conception of mind, matter, ideas, and a great deal else
besides.&nbsp;

We might understand the philosophical outlook that Descartes develops to
be marked and defined by the skepticism he employs in the First
Meditation. He begins by asking how he can be certain of anything and
then develops all sorts of inventive and outlandish reasons as to why he
ought to mistrust his senses. Philosophy ever since has been marked a
constant skepticism toward knowledge claims, and the very question of
how we can come to know anything with certainty has been much
debated.&nbsp;

Skepticism also informs the mind-body problem which has come to define
our conception of the human mind. Descartes develops a conception of the
mind where the senses and the imagination are also mental faculties.
Further, he argues that we are essentially thinking things that can know
our minds clearly and distinctly, but must work much harder to come to
an understanding of our bodies. Most important, he draws a very sharp
distinction between mind and body. Mind is essentially thinking and body
is essentially extended, so the two have nothing at all in common. Ever
since, philosophers have striven to understand how mind and body can
interact and relate with one another.&nbsp;

Skepticism and mind-body dualism have combined to create an
understanding of the human mind as being locked away inside a body and
separated off from the world. How this mind can come to know anything at
all about the world is a mystery, and the certainty of this knowledge is
sharply questioned. This conception of mind is so natural to us that it
is sometimes difficult to understand that the pre- Cartesian world had a
far less skeptical outlook toward knowledge and sensory
perception.&nbsp;

Descartes locates himself firmly in the rationalist camp, as opposed to
the empiricism of Aristotle or his contemporary, John Locke. He
constantly asserts that the clear and distinct perceptions of the
intellect are the only sure means of securing knowledge, and ultimately
concludes that the senses are not designed to give us knowledge at all,
but are rather meant to help us move through the world in a very
practical way.&nbsp;

While we can trace Descartes\' tremendous importance and influence to
the development of mind-body dualism and modern skepticism, he has also
provided a number of other seeds for debate. The Cartesian Circle, the
Wax Argument, and Descartes\' theories of ideas, of body, and of
perception are all important matters for discussion. His proofs for the
existence of God, however, are not original, nor are they very
successful. Descartes makes a fascinating subject for study since we can
see a modern worldview emerging as he writes.

**First Meditation: skeptical doubts&nbsp;**

**Summary&nbsp;**

The First Meditation, subtitled \"What can be called into doubt,\" opens
with the Meditator reflecting on the number of falsehoods he has
believed during his life and on the subsequent faultiness of the body of
knowledge he has built up from these falsehoods. He has resolved to
sweep away all he thinks he knows and to start again from the
foundations, building up his knowledge once more on more certain
grounds. He has seated himself alone, by the fire, free of all worries
so that he can demolish his former opinions with care.&nbsp;

The Meditator reasons that he need only find some reason to doubt his
present opinions in order to prompt him to seek sturdier foundations for
his knowledge. Rather than doubt every one of his opinions individually,
he reasons that he might cast them all into doubt if he can doubt the
foundations and basic principles upon which his opinions are
founded.&nbsp;

Everything that the Meditator has accepted as most true he has come to
learn from or through his senses. He acknowledges that sometimes the
senses can deceive, but only with respect to objects that are very small
or far away, and that our sensory knowledge on the whole is quite
sturdy. The Meditator acknowledges that insane people might be more
deceived, but that he is clearly not one of them and needn\'t worry
himself about that.&nbsp;

However, the Meditator realizes that he is often convinced when he is
dreaming that he is sensing real objects. He feels certain that he is
awake and sitting by the fire, but reflects that often he has dreamed
this very sort of thing and been wholly convinced by it. Though his
present sensations may be dream images, he suggests that even dream
images are drawn from waking experience, much like paintings in that
respect. Even when a painter creates an imaginary creature, like a
mermaid, the composite parts are drawn from real things\--women and
fish, in the case of a mermaid. And even when a painter creates
something entirely new, at least the colors in the painting are drawn
from real experience. Thus, the Meditator concludes, though he can doubt
composite things, he cannot doubt the simple and universal parts from
which they are constructed like shape, quantity, size, time, etc. While
we can doubt studies based on composite things, like medicine,
astronomy, or physics, he concludes that we cannot doubt studies based
on simple things, like arithmetic and geometry.&nbsp;

On further reflection, the Meditator realizes that even simple things
can be doubted. Omnipotent God could make even our conception of
mathematics false. One might argue that God is supremely good and would
not lead him to believe falsely all these things. But by this reasoning
we should think that God would not deceive him with regard to anything,
and yet this is clearly not true. If we suppose there is no God, then
there is even greater likelihood of being deceived, since our imperfect
senses would not have been created by a perfect being.&nbsp;

The Meditator finds it almost impossible to keep his habitual opinions
and assumptions out of his head, try as he might. He resolves to pretend
that these opinions are totally false and imaginary in order to
counter-balance his habitual way of thinking. He supposes that not God,
but some evil demon has committed itself to deceiving him so that
everything he thinks he knows is false. By doubting everything, he can
at least be sure not to be misled into falsehood by this demon.

### Analysis&nbsp;

The First Meditation is usually approached in one of two ways. First, it
can be read as setting the groundwork for the meditations that follow,
where doubt is employed as a powerful tool against Aristotelian
philosophy. Second, it can, and often is, read standing on its own as
the foundation of modern skepticism. We will briefly discuss these
complementary readings in turn.&nbsp;

Descartes saw his&nbsp;*Meditations*&nbsp;as providing the metaphysical
underpinning of his new physics. Like Galileo, he sought to overturn
two-thousand-year-old prejudices injected into the Western tradition by
Aristotle. The Aristotelian thought of Descartes\' day placed a great
weight on the testimony of the senses, suggesting that all knowledge
comes from the senses. The Meditator\'s suggestion that all one\'s most
certain knowledge comes from the senses is meant to appeal directly to
the Aristotelian philosophers who will be reading
the&nbsp;*Meditations.*&nbsp;The motivation, then, behind the First
Meditation is to start in a position the Aristotelian philosophers would
agree with and then, subtly, to seduce them away from it. Descartes is
aware of how revolutionary his ideas are, and must pay lip service to
the orthodox opinions of the day in order to be heeded.&nbsp;

Reading the First Meditation as an effort to coax Aristotelians away
from their customary opinions allows us to read different
interpretations into the different stages of doubt. For instance, there
is some debate as to whether Descartes intended his famous \"Dream
Argument\" to suggest the universal possibility of dreaming\--that
though there is waking experience, I can never know which moments are
dreams and which are waking\--or the possibility of a universal
dream\--that my whole life is a dream and that there is no waking world.
If we read Descartes as suggesting the universal possibility of
dreaming, we can explain an important distinction between the Dream
Argument and the later \"Evil Demon Argument.\" The latter suggests that
all we know is false and that we cannot trust the senses one bit. The
Dream Argument, if meant to suggest the universal possibility of
dreaming, suggests only that the senses are not always and wholly
reliable. The Dream Argument questions Aristotelian epistemology, while
the Evil Demon Argument does away with it altogether. The \"Painter\'s
Analogy,\" which draws on the Dream Argument, concludes that mathematics
and other purely cerebral studies are far more certain than astronomy or
physics, which is an important step away from the Aristotelian reliance
on the senses and toward Cartesian rationalism.&nbsp;

The&nbsp;*Meditations*&nbsp;can be seen to follow the model of St.
Ignatius of Loyola\'s&nbsp;*Spiritual Exercises.*&nbsp;The first step in
the Jesuit exercises is to purge oneself of one\'s attachment to the
material, sinful world. In the First Meditation, Descartes leads us
through a similar purgation, though with a different purpose. Here he
wants to persuade his Aristotelian readers to purge themselves of their
prejudices. He also hopes to lead the mind away from the senses that are
so heavily relied upon by the Aristotelians. In the meditations that
follow, he will argue that our most certain knowledge comes from the
mind unaided by the senses. Lastly, this process of radical doubt will
hopefully rule out any doubts from the positive claims Descartes will
build up in the next five meditations. Read in the wider context of
the&nbsp;*Meditations,*&nbsp;these skeptical doubts are a means to the
end of preparing a resistant audience to the metaphysics Descartes plans
to build.&nbsp;

Read on its own, the First Meditation can be seen as presenting
skeptical doubts as a subject of study in their own right. Certainly,
skepticism is a much discussed and hotly debated topic in philosophy,
even today. Descartes was the first to raise the mystifying question of
how we can claim to know with certainty anything about the world around
us. The idea is not that these doubts are probable, but that their
possibility can never be entirely ruled out. And if we can never be
certain, how can we claim to know anything? Skepticism cuts straight to
the heart of the Western philosophical enterprise and its attempt to
provide a certain foundation for our knowledge and understanding of the
world. It can even be pushed so far as to be read as a challenge to our
very notion of rationality.&nbsp;

No one actually lives skepticism\--no one actually doubts whether other
people really exist\--but it is very difficult to justify a dismissal of
skepticism. Western philosophy since Descartes has been largely marked
and motivated by an effort to overcome this problem. Particularly
interesting responses can be found in Hume, Kant, and Wittgenstein.

We should note that Descartes\' doubt is a methodological and rational
doubt. That is, the Meditator is not just doubting everything at random,
but is providing solid reasons for his doubt at each stage. For
instance, he rejects the possibility that he might be mad, since that
would undercut the rationality that motivates his doubt. Descartes is
trying to set up this doubt within a rational framework, and needs to
maintain a claim to rationality for his arguments to proceed.

**Second Meditation, Part 1:&nbsp;*cogito ergo sum*&nbsp;and&nbsp;*sum
res cogitans***

**Summary&nbsp;**

The Second Meditation is subtitled \"The nature of the human mind, and
how it is better known than the body\" and takes place the day after the
First Meditation.

**1^st^ part: the existence of the self**

[\[1\] Searching for an Archimedean Point]{.ul}

The Meditator is firm in his resolve to continue his search for
certainty and to [discard as false anything that is open to the
slightest doubt]{.ul}. He recalls Archimedes\' famous saying that he
could shift the entire earth given **one immovable point**: similarly,
he hopes to achieve great things if he can be certain of just one thing.

Recalling the previous meditation, he supposes that what he sees does
not exist, that his memory is faulty, that he has no senses and no body,
that extension, movement and place are mistaken notions. Perhaps, he
remarks, the only certain thing remaining is that there is no
certainty.&nbsp;

-   Then, he wonders, is not he, the source of these meditations, not
    something?

-   He has conceded that he has no senses and no body, but does that
    mean he cannot exist either?

-   **He has also noted that the physical world does not exist, which
    might also seem to imply his nonexistence. And yet to have these
    doubts, he must exist**.

\[2\] Descartes evokes the deceiving God + \[3\] The argument of
deceiving God proves that I exist

For an evil demon to mislead him in all these insidious ways, he must
exist in order to be misled. There must be an \"I\" that can doubt, be
deceived, and so on.

**I am, I exist**

He formulates the famous&nbsp;*cogito*&nbsp;argument, saying: \"So after
considering everything very thoroughly, I must finally conclude that
this proposition,&nbsp;*I am, I exist,*&nbsp;is necessarily true
whenever it is put forward by me or conceived in my mind.\"&nbsp;

**2^nd^ part: the nature of the self**

The Meditator\'s next question, then, is [what this \"I\" that exists
is.]{.ul} He initially thought that he had a soul, by means of which he
was nourished, moved, could sense and think; and also that he had a
body.

All these attributes have been cast into doubt, except one: **he cannot
doubt that he thinks**. He may exist without any other of the above
attributes, but **he cannot exist if he does not think.**

Further, he only exists as long as he is thinking. Therefore, thought
above all else is inseparable from being. The Meditator concludes that,
in the strict sense,

he is only a thing that thinks.

\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

The Analysis -- **The cogito argument**

The&nbsp;*cogito*&nbsp;argument is so called because of its Latin
formulation in the&nbsp;*Discourse on Method*: \"*cogito ergo sum*\"
(\"I think, therefore I am\").

This is possibly the most famous single line in all of philosophy and is
generally considered the starting point for modern Western philosophy.
In it, the Meditator finds his first grip on certainty after the radical
skepticism he posited in the First Meditation.

[The&nbsp;*cogito*&nbsp;presents a picture of the world and of knowledge
in which the mind is something that can know itself better than it can
know anything else]{.ul}. The idea that we know our mind first and
foremost has had a hypnotic hold on Western philosophy ever since, and
how the mind can connect with reality has ever since been a major
concern.

In this conception, the mind ceases to be something that helps us know
about the world and becomes something inside which we are locked.&nbsp;

We should note, however, the distinction between the \"I think,
therefore I am\" as stated in the&nbsp;*Discourse on Method*&nbsp;and
the formulation we get in the&nbsp;*Meditations*: \"So after considering
everything very thoroughly, I must finally conclude that this
proposition,&nbsp;*I am, I exist,*&nbsp;is necessarily true whenever it
is put forward by me or conceived in my mind.\" Neither \"therefore\"
nor \"I think\" appear in the&nbsp;*Meditations.*&nbsp;

The absence of \"therefore\" is important, since it dissuades us from
reading the&nbsp;*cogito*&nbsp;as a syllogism, that is, as a three-step
argument as follows:&nbsp;

*(1) Whatever thinks exists*

*(2) I think Therefore*

*(3) I exist&nbsp;*

The trouble with a syllogistic reading, which Descartes explicitly
denies elsewhere in his writings is that

-   No reason is given why (1) should be immune from the doubt that the
    Meditator has posited.

-   Also, the syllogistic reading interprets the&nbsp;*cogito*&nbsp;as a
    reasoned inference at a point in the Meditator\'s doubt when even
    reasoned inferences can be called into doubt.&nbsp;

But if everything is to be doubted, how can the Meditator know
the&nbsp;*cogito*? A number of readings have been given to understand
this step.

-   One is to read it as an intuition rather than an inference, as
    something that comes all at once, in a flash.

-   Another reading interprets the&nbsp;*cogito*&nbsp;as a performative
    utterance, where the utterance itself is what confirms its truth.
    That is, I could not say \"I exist\" if I did not exist or if I did
    not think, and so the act of saying it is what makes it true.

-   Thus, I can only affirm my own existence (not anybody else\'s) and I
    can only do so in the present tense: I cannot say \"I thought,
    therefore I was/am.\"&nbsp;

It should be noted that the&nbsp;*cogito*&nbsp;only works for thought. I
cannot say, \"I walk, therefore I am,\" since I can doubt I am walking.
The reason I cannot doubt that I am thinking is that doubt itself is a
form of thought.&nbsp;

After the&nbsp;*cogito,*&nbsp;the Meditator advances the claim that he
is a thing that thinks, an argument called the&nbsp;*sum res
cogitans,*&nbsp;after its Latin formulation. There are three
controversies regarding the claim \"I am\...in the strict sense only a
thing that thinks,\" which we will examine in turn: whether the claim is
metaphysical or epistemological, what is meant by \"thing,\" and what is
meant by \"thinking.\"

**Second Meditation, Part 2: the wax argument&nbsp;**

The Meditator tries to clarify precisely what this \"I\" is, this
\"thing that thinks.\" **He concludes that he is not only something that
thinks, understands, and wills, but is also something that imagines and
senses.**

After all, he may be dreaming or deceived by an evil demon, but he can
still imagine things and he still&nbsp;*seems*&nbsp;to hear and see
things. [His sensory perceptions may not be veridical, but they are
certainly a part of the same mind that thinks]{.ul}.&nbsp;

The Meditator then moves on to ask how he comes to know of this \"I.\"

-   The **senses**, as we have seen, **cannot be trusted**. Similarly,
    he concludes, he cannot trust the imagination.

-   The imagination can conjure up ideas of all sorts of things that are
    not real, so it cannot be the guide to knowing his own essence.

Still, the Meditator remains puzzled. If, as he has concluded, he is a
thinking thing, why is it that he has such a distinct grasp of what his
body is and has such a difficult time identifying what is this \"I\"
that thinks? In order to understand this difficulty he considers how we
come to know of a piece of wax just taken from a honeycomb: through the
senses or by some other means?

&nbsp;

He first considers what he can know about the piece of wax by means of
the senses: its taste, smell, color, shape, size, hardness, etc. The
Meditator then asks what happens when the piece of wax is placed near
the fire and melted. All of these sensible qualities change, so that,
for instance, it is now soft when before it was hard. Nonetheless, the
same piece of wax still remains. Our knowledge that the solid piece of
wax and the melted piece of wax are the same cannot come through the
senses since all of its sensible properties have changed.&nbsp;

The Meditator considers what he can know about the piece of wax and
concludes that he can know only that it is extended, flexible, and
changeable. He does not come to know this through the senses and
realizes that it is impossible that he comes to know the wax by means of
the imagination: the wax can change into an infinite number of different
shapes and he cannot run through all these shapes in his imagination.

Instead, he concludes, he knows the wax by means of the intellect alone.
His mental perception of it can either be imperfect and confused (as
when he allowed herself to be led by his senses and imagination) or it
can be clear and distinct, as it is when he applies only careful mental
scrutiny to his perception of it.&nbsp;

The Meditator reflects on how easy it is to be deceived regarding these
matters. After all, we might say \"I see the wax,\" though in saying
that we refer to the wax as the intellect perceives it, rather than to
its color or shape. This is similar to the way in which we might \"see\"
people down in the street when all we really see are coats and hats.
**Our intellect (and not our eyes) judges that there are people, and not
automata, under those coats and hats.&nbsp;The Meditator concludes that,
contrary to his initial impulses, the mind is a far better knower than
the body.**

Further, he suggests, **he must know his mind far better than other
things**. After all, as he has admitted, he may not be perceiving the
piece of wax at all: it may be a dream or an illusion. But when he is
perceiving the piece of wax, he cannot doubt that he is perceiving nor
that he is judging what he perceives to be a piece of wax, and both of
these acts of thought imply that he exists.

Every thought we might have about the world outside us can only
doubtfully be true of the outside world, but it must with certainty
confirm our own existence and establish the nature of our own mind.

**The Meditator happily concludes that he can know at least that he
exists, that he is a thinking thing, that his mind is better known than
his body, and that all clear and distinct perceptions come by means of
the intellect alone, and not the senses or the imagination**.&nbsp;

### 

### Analysis&nbsp; {#analysis}

The first paragraph of the above summary covers the ninth paragraph of
the Second Meditation. We could identify this moment as the invention of
the modern mind. The Aristotelian conception of the mind separates
intellection and understanding as attributes of a soul that survive
death. Sensing, imagining, willing, etc., are all attached to the
sensory world and are therefore distinct, according to Aristotle.

In the Cartesian conception of mind, there is a sharp distinction
between mind and world, where all those activities (like sensing and
imagining) that could take place in dreams or in disembodied minds are
considered mental activities, and exist only in the mind.

Things in the world such as trees or light waves are then totally
separate from things in the mind, and it becomes a major concern for
modern philosophy to determine how the two connect. For instance, there
seems to be some connection between my visual sensations and the objects
in the world that I see, but since visual sensations are a part of the
mind and the objects I see are a part of the world, it is very difficult
to determine what that connection is.

This picture of mind may seem intuitive to us now, but it and the
theories of mind that have sprung from it originate in Descartes. Only
in the twentieth century have philosophers like Wittgenstein, William
James, and J. L. Austin come to question Descartes\' sharp distinction
between mind and world.&nbsp;

The rest of the Second Meditation concentrates on the \"Wax Argument\"
with which Descartes hopes to show definitively that **we come to know
things through the intellect rather than through the senses** and that
**we know the mind better than anything else**. His argument focuses on
the process of change by which solid wax melts into a liquid puddle.

The senses seem to tell us things about the world, and Descartes
**admits that what we know about the solid piece of wax we know through
the senses**. The senses can similarly inform us about the melted wax,
**but** **they cannot tell us that the melted wax and the solid wax are
one and the same**.

Nor, Descartes argues, can the imagination.

Only the intellect can organize and make sense of what we perceive.
**The senses only perceive a disconnected jumble of information: the
intellect is what helps us to understand it.&nbsp;**

This argument is another move against the Aristotelian theory of
knowledge, according to which all knowledge comes from the senses.
Descartes acknowledges that the senses inform us about the world, but
asserts that the senses can only give us disorganized information.
Without the intellect, we could make no sense of what we perceive.

Descartes thus places himself firmly in the rationalist camp, as
compared to empiricists such as Aristotle or Locke who argue for a
sense-based theory of knowledge.&nbsp;

Descartes\' next move is a little more questionable. He asserts that
\"I\" cannot know with certainty that what \"I\" perceive is real (as
per the doubts of the First Meditation**),** but that sensory
perception, as a form of thought, confirms that \"I\" exist (\"I\" being
the mind.)

Every time \"I\" perceive \"I\" am thinking, and in thinking \"I\" am
enacting the&nbsp;*cogito.*&nbsp;Every perception confirms the existence
of \"my\" mind and only gives dubitable evidence for the existence of
the world. Thus, Descartes concludes, the mind is better known than the
body.&nbsp;

This argument is plausible if Descartes means that the existence of the
mind is better known than the existence of the body, but it seems that
he wants to say that the nature of the mind is better known than the
nature of the body. [That is, Descartes wants to say that \"I\" know not
only that the mind exists, but also \"I\" know more about the mind than
about the world outside the mind.]{.ul}

This argument would only hold if every thought, perception, imagination,
etc., told \"me\" something new about the mind. But, according to
the&nbsp;*cogito,*&nbsp;all these thoughts tell \"me\" only one and the
same thing: that \"I\" exist, and that \"I\" am a thing that thinks.

Descartes is not as clear as we might like him to be as to what and how
exactly each new thought makes the mind better known than the body.

**Third Meditation, Part 1: clear and distinct perceptions and
Descartes\' theory of ideas&nbsp;**

**Summary&nbsp;**

**Premises of the Meditator**

The Third Meditation, subtitled \"The existence of God,\" opens with the
Meditator reviewing what he has ascertained to date. He is still
doubtful of the existence of bodily things, but is certain that he
exists and that he is a thinking thing that doubts, understands, wills,
imagines, and senses, among other things.&nbsp;

He is certain that he is a thinking thing and he clearly and distinctly
perceives this fact. He could not be certain unless all clear and
distinct perceptions can be certain. Therefore, he concludes, whatever
he perceives clearly and distinctly must be true.&nbsp;

Before, he thought he was certain of all sorts of things that he has now
cast into doubt. These things are all apprehended by the senses, and [he
must acknowledge now that he did not perceive the things themselves, but
only the ideas, or thoughts, of those things, which appeared before his
mind]{.ul}.

He does not even now deny that he perceives ideas of material objects,
but concedes that he was mistaken in inferring from these ideas that his
perception could inform him about the things themselves (essence).

He also seems quite certain of arithmetic and geometry, though he cannot
be absolutely certain since God might be deceiving him. To assure
himself that he is not deceived, he must inquire into the nature of
God.&nbsp;

Before he can do so, however, the Meditator resolves first to classify
his thoughts into different kinds.

1.  First, there are **simply ideas**, which he says \"are as it were
    the images of things\...for example, when I think of a man, or a
    chimera, or the sky, or an angel, or God.\"

2.  Second, there **are volitions, emotions, and judgment**s, where
    there is an idea, which is the object of a thought, and also a
    further thing, such as an affirmation or a fear, which is directed
    toward the object of that thought.&nbsp;

The Meditator reasons that he cannot be mistaken with regard to ideas on
their own, nor with regard to volitions or emotions: he can only make
mistakes with respect to judgments. [The most common error in judgment
is to judge that the ideas in one\'s mind conform to, or resemble,
things outside the mind]{.ul}. Considering ideas in the mind only as
modes of thought and not referring them to anything outside the mind
should render him immune from doubt.&nbsp;

It seems there are three sources for ideas:

-   They can be innate;

-   They can be adventitious, coming from outside of us, as with our
    sensory perceptions;

-   They can be invented by us, such as our ideas of mermaids or
    unicorns.

The Meditator concedes that he cannot yet be certain which ideas come
from where, or even if perhaps all of our ideas are innate, adventitious
(not inherent but added extrinsically), or invented. For the moment, he
is concerned with adventitious ideas, and why he thinks they come from
outside. His will has no effect on adventitious ideas: he cannot prevent
himself from feeling hot when it is hot simply through the will, for
instance. He has thus come to assume that whatever outside source
transmits these adventitious ideas transmits its own likeness rather
than something else.

The Meditator then contrasts his natural assumption that adventitious
ideas represent outside objects with his knowledge that he exists. He
cannot doubt that he exists or that this fact follows from the fact that
he doubts, because that truth is \"revealed\...by the natural light.\"
Natural assumptions, on the other hand, are far less certain than the
natural light, and have misled him in the past.

Further, he has no reason to suppose that these ideas are adventitious
at all. The will may have no effect on them, but they still may be
produced from within him. And if they do come from without, there is no
reason to think that they resemble the objects that they represent. For
instance, the sun looks very small according to our senses, but
astronomical reasoning suggests that it is in fact very large.&nbsp;

###  {#section}

### Analysis&nbsp; {#analysis}

Having ascertained that he exists and that he is a thinking thing, the
Meditator tries to determine how he can know these things, and whether
he might come to know other things as well by similar means. He
concludes that his knowledge of the&nbsp;*cogito*&nbsp;and the&nbsp;*sum
res cogitans*&nbsp;are clear and distinct perceptions. Thus, he
concludes, all clear and distinct perceptions (which he sometimes refers
to as \"the natural light\") must be certain.&nbsp;

The reasoning here might seem a little circular.

-   On one hand, the&nbsp;*cogito*&nbsp;is certain because it is clearly
    and distinctly perceived.

-   On the other hand, clear and distinct perceptions must be certain
    because they are the means by which the certainty of
    the&nbsp;*cogito*&nbsp;is achieved.

There is also the difficulty raised with the case of geometry and
arithmetic. These truths seem clear and distinct to us as well, but
there is still the possibility that we are deceived with respect to
them. And if God can deceive us of our clear and distinct perceptions,
perhaps even the&nbsp;*cogito*&nbsp;can be cast back into doubt.&nbsp;

Descartes seems to want to escape the problems involved in clear and
distinct perceptions by relying on God\'s existence to make them true.
However, Descartes also seems to want to prove God\'s existence by
claiming it as a clear and distinct perception. This further conundrum
is famously called the \"Cartesian Circle,\" and we will look at it more
closely in the commentary to the Third Meditation, Part 3.&nbsp;

The discussion of the theory of ideas is a preamble to Descartes\'
attempt to prove the existence of God. According to Descartes, ideas are
the atoms of thought, and all thought is made up of composite ideas.
Descartes\' suggestion that ideas are \"as it were the images of
things\" is not meant to reduce ideas to being simply visual
representations. We can have ideas of God, of justice, of how to fix the
kitchen sink, none of which are necessarily accompanied by an
image\--hence the \"as it were\" that qualifies \"the images of
things.\"&nbsp;

Some ideas are ideas in the strict sense only, while others are ideas in
the strict sense as well as something else. That \"something else\" can
be volition, emotion, or judgment. Descartes is particularly interested
in judgments, since these are the things we can be wrong about, and he
wishes to identify the source of error in order to identify the source
of doubt. Most error in judgment has to do with identifying things in
the material world, since that is where the mind tries to pass judgment
regarding things outside of it.

Thus, of innate, invented, and adventitious ideas, Descartes takes the
greatest interest in adventitious (not inherent but added extrinsically)
ideas. [He realizes that often we assume we are perceiving things
outside our mind without any degree of certainty or justification.]{.ul}

**Third Meditation, Part 2: Descartes\' theory of ideas&nbsp;*(cont.)***

**Summary&nbsp;**

The Meditator reasons that all ideas are mere modes of thought, and in
that sense they are all equal: they all have the same amount of formal
reality, that is, reality intrinsic to themselves.

However, what they represent differs greatly, and so their objective
reality\--the reality of the things they represent\--also differs
greatly. Thus, the idea of God has more objective reality than the idea
of a tree, which has in turn more objective reality than the idea of the
color red.

Nonetheless, all three of these ideas are just ideas, and all have the
same degree of formal reality. (The commentary section below will
explain in more detail what is meant by \"formal\" and \"objective\"
reality and what it means to have more or less reality.)&nbsp;

The Meditator asserts that no effect can have a greater amount of
reality than its cause. That is, everything that comes into being must
be made to be by something that has an equal or greater amount of
reality. For instance, a stone can be made by chipping off a larger
piece of rock, since the larger rock has more reality, but a stone
cannot be made out of a color, since a stone has more reality than a
color.

The Meditator also suggests that an idea can only be caused by something
that has as much formal reality as the idea has objective reality. The
idea of a stone, then, could be caused by a stone or a large rock but it
could not be caused by a color. **The Meditator grants that ideas can be
caused by other ideas, but that there must ultimately be something more
than an idea that is the cause of these ideas.** The first cause of an
idea must be something with at least as much formal reality as the idea
has objective reality.&nbsp;

If he can conceive of some idea with so much objective reality that it
must come from some cause with more formal reality than he herself
possesses, the Meditator reasons that he will then know that something
outside his mind exists.

His ideas of other people, animals, and angels can easily come from
himself even if no such things exist. Similarly, corporeal things
contain nothing so great that it could not originate in him. From the
reasoning of the Wax Argument, he has concluded that he can only clearly
and distinctly perceive properties like size, extension, shape, motion,
duration, number, and substance when examining corporeal things. Most of
these properties the Meditator himself also possesses. And even if, as a
thinking thing, he may not have size, extension, shape, or motion, these
properties are modes of the substance of body, and, as a thinking thing,
he is a substance, and therefore has more reality than these modes.
(Cartesian ontology, modes, and substances, will also be elucidated in
the commentary.)&nbsp;

Sensible qualities like color, sound, smell, taste, heat, cold, and so
on are only perceived in a confused and obscure way, and the Meditator
is not even certain as to whether or not they are things or non-things.
If they are things, they must have such a small degree of reality as to
originate unproblematically from the Meditator himself.&nbsp;

**Analysis&nbsp;**

This section of text dives right into a number of distinctions made by
the medieval Scholastic philosophers that would have been very current
in Descartes\' day. Their currency has since waned and these terms are
no longer familiar to the ordinary reader, so what follows will be a
brief tutorial on Cartesian ontology and distinctions within the theory
of ideas.&nbsp;

For Descartes, as for most thinkers of his time, the fundamental
building blocks of reality are called substances. Substances can exist
independently and are indestructible.

In Cartesian ontology, there are two kinds of substances: bodies and
minds.

Of substances that are minds, there are

3.  Finite minds, such as people and angels

4.  There is the infinite mind, God. Thus, when the Meditator asserts
    the&nbsp;*sum res cogitans,*&nbsp;he is asserting that, as a
    substance, he is a mind rather than a body.

All substances also have affections, things that hold of the substances.
Affections are not substances themselves because they cannot exist
independently of the substances that they affect. Affections can be
divided between attributes and modes, and attributes can be divided
between primary attributes and omni-generic attributes. Primary
attributes are those attributes that explain the essence of the
substance they belong to. According to Descartes, the primary attribute
of body is extension and the **primary attribute of mind is thought.**
Thus, all bodies are necessarily extended in space and all things that
are extended in space are necessarily bodies.

Similarly with minds and thought: all thinking things are minds, and all
minds think. Omni-generic attributes are attributes that can hold of any
substance and do not define their essence. Examples are existence,
duration, and number. Modes are modifications of primary attributes,
ways in which something can have a certain primary attribute. For
instance, squareness is a mode of extension since it is a way in which a
body might be extended. Similarly with color, size, other shapes,
motion, etc., for bodies; and imagining, willing, sensing, feeling,
etc., for minds.&nbsp;

Now we move on to the distinction between formal and objective reality.
For Descartes and the Scholastics, ideas are the link that connect mind
and world because they have both formal and objective reality. To
clarify the distinction once more:

5.  Formal reality is the kind of reality things have in this world

6.  Objective reality is the reality of the objects represented by
    different ideas.

Thus, an idea can have formal reality, being a mode of thought itself,
and it can also have objective reality, representing something outside
of itself.&nbsp;

When Descartes speaks of things as having more or less reality than
other things, we can understand him as roughly dividing up reality along
a scale where infinite substances (i.e., God) have the most reality,
followed by finite substances, followed by modes.

As we mentioned earlier:

7.  Finite substances are bodies and minds

8.  Modes are modifications of body and mind, like color, shape, size,
    imagination, idea, will, etc...

This implies, among other things, that ideas have the formal reality of
modes, since they are modifications of mind. So, for instance, the idea
of a car would have the formal reality of a mode (since it is an idea)
and the objective reality of a finite substance (since the idea is of a
car, which is a body). On the other hand, the idea of the fear of cars
would have the formal reality of a mode (since it is an idea) and the
objective reality of a mode (since the idea is of a fear, and fear is
also a mode of thought).&nbsp;

According to Descartes, something with a certain degree of objective
reality must ultimately be caused by something with that degree of
formal reality. So, for instance, the idea of a car (which has the
objective reality of a finite substance) might be caused by the idea of
a bicycle, which only has the formal reality of a mode, but that idea of
a bicycle might then have been caused by a bicycle itself, which has the
formal reality of a finite substance.

If we trace the causal chain far enough back, we will find a cause with
as much formal reality as the idea has objective reality. **If the
Meditator can locate an idea that has more objective reality than he has
formal reality, he can conclude that there must exist something outside
of himself which had to create the idea**. Since he has the formal
reality of a finite substance, the only thing that has more reality is
infinite substance. Thus, he will try to prove that something besides
himself exists by contemplating his idea of God.

**Third Meditation, part 3: the existence of God and the Cartesian
Circle&nbsp;**

**Summary&nbsp;**

When considering God as \"a substance that is infinite, eternal,
immutable, independent, supremely intelligent, supremely powerful, and
which created both myself and everything else,\" the Meditator realizes
that the idea of God must have far more objective reality than he has
formal reality: God is an infinite substance whereas he is only a finite
substance. Since the idea of God cannot have originated in himself, he
concludes that God must be the cause of this idea and must therefore
necessarily exist.&nbsp;

The Meditator counters the argument that he might conceive of an
infinite being through negation, that is, through conceiving of it in
contrast to his own finite being. **Doubts and desires come from an
understanding that we lack something, and we would not be aware of that
lack unless we were aware of a more perfect being that has those things
which we lack.**&nbsp;

While he can doubt the existence of other things, he cannot doubt the
existence of God, since he has such a clear and distinct perception of
God\'s existence. The idea has infinite objective reality, and is
therefore more likely to be true than any other idea.&nbsp;

**Could I be the cause of something infinite?**

The Meditator then entertains the possibility that he may be supremely
perfect, that all his deficiencies are potentialities within him, and
that he is slowly improving toward perfection. If perfection is a
potentiality within him, then it is plausible that the idea of God could
be conceived in him without any outside cause. The Meditator rejects
this possibility for three reasons:

-   First, God is all actual and not at all potential;

-   Second, if he is constantly improving, he will never attain that
    perfection where there is no room for improvement;

-   Third, potential being is not being at all: the idea of God must be
    caused by something with infinite actual being.&nbsp;

If the Meditator could exist without God, he would have come to be out
of herself, or from his parents, or from some other being less perfect
than God. If he derived his existence from himself, there is no reason
that he should have doubts and desires.

He also cannot escape this reasoning by supposing he has always existed
and never had to come into being. There is no reason that he should
continue to exist unless there is some force that preserves him, that
creates him anew at every instant. As a thinking thing, he should be
aware of that power of preservation though it came from within
him.&nbsp;

If his parents or some other imperfect being created him, this creator
must have endowed him with the idea of God. If this creator is a finite
being, we must still ask with respect to it how it came to possess the
idea of an infinite God. We can trace this chain back through countless
creators, but we must ultimately conclude that the idea of God can
originate only in God, and not in some finite being.

Having concluded that God must necessarily exist, the Meditator asks how
he received the idea of God. The idea cannot be adventitious, coming
from without, nor can it be invented by the Meditator. Thus**, the idea
must be innate, and the Meditator must have been created by God with
this idea already in him**. He clearly and distinctly perceives that God
is no deceiver, since all deception relies on some defect or other, and
a perfect God has no defects.&nbsp;

###  {#section-1}

### Analysis&nbsp; {#analysis-1}

Now that we have reached the end of the Third Meditation, we can more
easily review the overall strategy that Descartes is pursuing.

1.  The Meditation begins with the Meditator certain only that he exists
    and that he is a thinking thing.

2.  He concludes that he comes to know these facts through clear and
    distinct perception, and reasons that it should follow that all his
    other clear and distinct perceptions are true.

3.  In order to confirm the truth of clear and distinct perceptions,
    however, he must prove the existence of a benevolent God. If God
    were a deceiver, he could be deceived even with respect to his clear
    and distinct perceptions.&nbsp;

4.  **However, the proof of the existence of God relies on the
    Meditator\'s having a clear and distinct perception of the idea of
    God**. The proof seems to fall into what is now called the
    \"Cartesian Circle.\"\
    The Meditator seems committed to claiming both\
    (a) that we can only be sure of our clear and distinct perceptions
    if God exists\
    (b) we can know that God exists because we clearly and distinctly
    perceive the idea of God. If both (a) and (b) are true, Descartes is
    guilty of circular reasoning.&nbsp;

There are number of ways in which we could attempt to release Descartes
from this circle.

-   One strategy, called the \"Cartesian spiral,\" is to suggest that
    the clear and distinct perceptions going into the proof of God\'s
    existence are different from the ones that follow from it. For
    instance, my clear and distinct perception that 2 + 3 = 5 can be
    doubted unless God confirms it, **but my clear and distinct
    perception of the idea of God is somehow immune from doubt**. In
    this reading, there are different kinds of clear and distinct
    perceptions, some of which are totally immune from doubt and some of
    which need God to confirm them. This reading is made plausible by
    the fact that my clear and distinct perception that 2 + 3 = 5 is a
    judgment and therefore open to error, whereas my clear and distinct
    perception that God exists is simply an idea in the strict sense,
    with no judgment attached.&nbsp;

-   Another strategy is to re-evaluate the epistemological role that God
    is meant to play in the&nbsp;*Meditations.*&nbsp;According to this
    reading, God cannot possibly be intended by Descartes as
    confirmation of clear and distinct perceptions. If that were the
    case, it would be a lost cause to try to prove God\'s existence by
    means of the intellect, since we would not be able to prove anything
    by means of the intellect until we know that God exists. Rather than
    seeing God as the confirmation of clear and distinct perceptions**,
    we could read God as a buffer against doubt**. We know clear and
    distinct perceptions independently of God, but God\'s existence also
    provides us with the certainty that we might not otherwise have. In
    this reading,\
    (b) is true\
    but we would re-formulate (a) as saying that we can re-affirm our
    clear and distinct perceptions retrospectively once we are certain
    that God exists.\
    The problem with this reading is that it totally re-structures the
    way we understand the&nbsp;*Meditations*: clear and distinct
    perceptions, and not God, become the ultimate foundation for
    knowledge.&nbsp;

We should note that, in spite of the revolutionary originality of much
of the&nbsp;*Meditations,* Descartes\' proofs of the existence of God
are derivative of proofs that were popular among the Scholastic
philosophers. This proof relies on causal reasoning, suggesting that
there must be a cause of the idea of God that is as great as God
himself.

Though my idea of God might have come from my father, and my father\'s
idea of God might have come from a priest, **the suggestion is that at
the end of that causal chain, there is a first cause, which is God.**
The proof of the first cause is usually used in pointing out that there
must be some unmoved mover at the source of all change in this universe.
However, this proof has since been discredited, since it relies on a
faulty understanding of causation which assumes, among other things,
that all causal chains must have a first term.

No \"proof\" of the existence of God is widely accepted today, and the
search for such a proof is no longer a hot philosophical topic. While
there is still disagreement over whether or not God exists and what
God\'s nature is, it is generally agreed that God\'s existence cannot be
proved through a feat of the intellect. (For example, Kierkegaard
asserted that belief in God requires a \"leap of faith\" rather than a
rigorous proof.)&nbsp;

**Fourth Meditation, Part 1: God is no deceiver&nbsp;**

**Summary&nbsp;**

The Fourth Meditation, subtitled \"Truth and falsity,\" opens with the
Meditator reflecting on the ground he has covered so far, observing
**that all his certain knowledge, and in particular the most certain
knowledge that God exists, comes from the intellect**, and not from the
senses or the imagination.

Now that he is certain of God\'s existence, a great deal more can
follow.

1.  First, he knows that God would not deceive him, since the will to
    deceive is a sign of weakness or malice, and God\'s perfection would
    not allow it (for definition).

2.  Second, if God created him, God is responsible for his judgment, and
    so his faculty of judgment must be infallible so long as he uses it
    correctly.&nbsp;

This is all well and good, the Meditator reasons, but if God has endowed
him with infallible judgment, how is it that he can be mistaken, as he
undoubtedly is from time to time?

**The Meditator explains that he finds himself somewhere between God**
(a perfect, complete, and supreme being) **and nothingness**.

[He was created by a supreme and infinite being, and all created in him
by that supreme being is infallible, but he was also created to be only
a finite being]{.ul}. While he participates partly in the supreme being
of God, he also participates partly in nothingness. When he is wrong, it
is not the result of some faulty faculty created by God, but is rather
the result of his non-being, his lack of perfection.

Everything that God has created is perfect, but God has created the
Meditator as a finite being whose finitude and lack of perfection still
leave room for error.&nbsp;

But the Meditator remains unsatisfied. If God is a perfect creator, God
should be able to create perfect beings.

Surely, **God could have willed it so that the Meditator would never
err, and God always wills what is best**. **The Meditator reflects that
God\'s motives and reasons are incomprehensible to finite beings such as
himself**.

For this reason also[, he rejects the search for final causes in
physics: it would require a great deal of arrogance to try to read
God\'s mind or understand God\'s motives.]{.ul}

Rather than look at one isolated part of the universe, the Meditator
suggests he might find perfection if he looks at God\'s creation as a
whole. **He may appear to be an imperfect being when considered on his
own, but he may play a perfectly appropriate role in the wider context
of a perfect universe.&nbsp;**

**Analysis&nbsp;**

In Descartes\' denial that God could be a deceiver, he is employing a
conception of power and existence that would have been familiar in his
day, but which might strike us as rather odd today. **Existence and the
power to act are both conceived by Descartes to be positives**. The more
power and existence one has, the better one is. Evil and negative acts
are not a result of some negative being that counterbalances positive
being, but result rather from a lack of being.

In being supremely good, God must also have infinite being and infinite
power, since these are associated with goodness. An act of deception is
an act of falsity, and falsity deals with what is not. Thus, by
Descartes\' reasoning**, God cannot be a deceiver since he is supremely
real and does not participate in any way in nothingness**. People, on
the other hand, are understood by **Descartes to have finite being, and
that their lack of infinite being implies that they also participate in
nothingness**. If there were a line, with God as absolute being on one
end, and nothingness and evil on the other end, humans would be
somewhere in the middle. Our ability to err comes to us insofar as we
participate in nothingness rather than in God.&nbsp;

To better understand why Descartes has this conception of good and
existence would require a better understanding of the history of ethics.

Briefly: Descartes is inheriting an ancient Greek conception of virtue,
where what is real, what is true, and what is good are all closely
linked. Being good is simply a matter of participating in what is real,
and being evil is linked with unreality. The Greek philosophical world
was one with a teleology, in which there was reason and purpose in the
very workings of the world; being good was seen to be simply a matter of
approximating this reality. Descartes is still entrenched in the ancient
worldview that he inherited from the Scholastics. This worldview has
changed since, as we find in later philosophers like Kant.

According to Kant, reason and purpose are things that we apply to the
world. Thus, goodness is an idea that our reason imposes upon a morally
neutral universe. It is Kant\'s worldview that we now understand, and it
is often difficult to understand a worldview where goodness and
existence are considered one and the same.&nbsp;

The Meditator also questions why a supremely good God would not create
us with infinite being. In sum, we are given a variant on the answer,
\"The Lord works in mysterious ways.\"

**The Meditator suggests that God\'s motives are beyond our meager
comprehension**. While on our own, we may be seen as imperfect, we are
only a small part of a much larger creation. We might think of a
steering wheel on its own as rather useless and imperfect, but when we
see it in the larger context of a car, we understand that it is
perfectly designed to suit its purpose.

Fourth Meditation, Part 2: Will, intellect, and the possibility of error&nbsp;
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Summary&nbsp;

The Meditator next looks at the source of his errors. They depend
simultaneously upon the intellect (the faculty of knowledge) and the
will (the faculty of choice, or freedom of the will).

**Intellect?**

The **intellect**, however, [only allows us to perceive ideas, not to
make judgments]{.ul} on them, and so in this strict sense, **it cannot
be the source of error.**

**Will?**

In contrast to the intellect, which he knows is limited, the Meditator
reflects that he could not conceive of his will as being any greater or
more perfect. In all his other mental faculties (memory, imagination,
understanding, etc..) the Meditator realizes that God is endowed to a
much greater degree than he is.

**But in freedom of choice, or the will, the Meditator realizes he is
unlimited, and in this respect more than any other he resembles her
creator**. God\'s will may be greater in that it is accompanied by a
greater knowledge and power and that it ranges over everything, but when
considering the will in the strict sense, the Meditator concludes that
his will is just as great as God\'s.

Exercising the will consists simply in affirming or denying, pursuing or
avoiding. The feeling of indifference is not a weakness in will but
rather a lack of knowledge of what is the true or right course to
pursue. Thus, God\'s will is only superior to our own in that God has
supreme knowledge and can always will what is good.&nbsp;

**Since the will is perfect and unlimited, it cannot be the source of
error**.

Similarly, since his understanding, or intellect, was created by God, it
can never be wrong either.

The Meditator concludes that error results not from imperfections in
either of these faculties, but from the fact that the will has a far
wider scope than the understanding.

[As a result, the will often passes judgments on matters that are not
fully understood and toward which it is indifferent]{.ul}. For instance,
the Meditator has such a clear and distinct perception that he exists
that he cannot help but judge (will) that this is true.

However, he is as yet uncertain about his relationship to the corporeal
body that he normally assumes is his. Since he does not have a proper
understanding of the relationship between mind and body, he is
indifferent as to whether he should assent or deny that the mind and the
body are identical and is liable to make a false judgment.

**In all matters of the intellect except for clear and distinct
perceptions, there is some level of conjecture and uncertainty, and so
the will is liable to make a false judgment**.

The correct use of the will in cases of uncertainty is simply to refrain
from judgment. When \"I\" affirm or deny in cases of uncertainty, \"I\"
will either be in error or \"I\" will arrive at the truth purely by
chance.&nbsp;

The Meditator concludes

1.  that he cannot complain that God has created him imperfectly. **It
    is only natural that he has a finite intellect, and the will is
    indivisible, so it cannot be anything less than complete**.

2.  He cannot complain about the imperfections in him that lead to false
    judgment, since **he is only a small part of God\'s larger creation,
    and his role in that creation is perfect even if he may seem
    imperfect when considered alone**.

3.  **He concludes he can also avoid error completely by suspending
    judgment in cases where he is uncertain**, and only passing
    judgments on clear and distinct perceptions.&nbsp;

###  {#section}

### Analysis&nbsp; {#analysis}

This section draws an important distinction between the intellect and
the will.

-   The intellect is the faculty that not only understands and thinks,
    but also senses and imagines. All these are value-neutral acts in
    themselves.

-   The will is responsible for affirming and denying, and it is in the
    will that value and the possibility for error manifest themselves.

For instance, my visual perception of a tree is created in the
intellect, but it is the will that either affirms that it is indeed a
tree, or suspends judgment because I might be dreaming.

Thus, even if I am just hallucinating and there is no tree, my intellect
is not mistaken in reporting this perception to me, but my will would be
mistaken in judging that it is indeed a tree.&nbsp;

The intellect is finite and limited because there are varying degrees at
which perceptions and understanding can function. For instance, some of
us can only do simple arithmetic, while some of us can calculate
differential equations in a snap, while none of us can understand all
the mysteries of the universe.

The will, on the other hand, is not finite because its efficacy is not a
matter of degree. Because I have a free will, I can affirm or deny any
proposition put to me by my intellect. The fact that we do not always
affirm or deny, the Meditator asserts, is not due to a weakness in the
will, but due to a weakness in the intellect. Often, the intellect does
not understand a matter well enough to allow the will to make an
informed judgment and so the will suspends judgment instead.&nbsp;

The source of error, then, lies in this disparity between the scope of
the will and the scope of the intellect. The will is unlimited and can
affirm or deny any proposition, while the intellect is limited and can
only clearly and distinctly perceive a small number of propositions.

Most of what the intellect perceives is confused and obscure, like our
sensory perceptions. The only time that we can be certain that we are
judging correctly is in cases of clear and distinct perception.

The question then arises of how we can know which perceptions are clear
and distinct. Descartes\' answer is that clear and distinct perceptions
are those that the will cannot help but affirm.

For instance, the Meditator finds it impossible to deny that he exists,
since his every thought confirms his existence. On the other hand, he
can doubt what he sees, as the Dream Argument (in the First Meditation)
shows.

Therefore, visual perceptions are not clear and distinct.

The objection could then be raised as to what we are to make of a fool
who cannot help but affirm that 2 + 2 = 22. How can we know that our
inability to deny the&nbsp;*cogito*&nbsp;or mathematical truths is not a
result of a weakness of our own? The answer to this question is not at
all clear, and it is hard to give a better answer than that the fool who
thinks that 2 + 2 = 22 ought to think harder before affirming his
judgment.&nbsp;

We should also note that Descartes is a proponent of free will. The
Meditator asserts that only the will, of all human mental faculties, is
on an equal footing with God\'s, because it is unlimited. The will is
free to affirm or deny whatever it wishes. In fact, **free will is the
source of error**: if God had not blessed us with free will, we would
not blithely pass judgments on our confused and obscure perceptions and
we would never make mistakes.&nbsp;

**Free Will**

The problem of free will and determinism is a common one in philosophy,
and it is important that we explain the compatibilist position of
Descartes. The problem runs something like this: \"if we are a part of
nature and subject to nature\'s deterministic laws, how is it that we
can have free will?\"

Descartes\' answer is that we do not have the \"freedom of
indifference,\" that we could have acted differently. All his conception
of free will requires is that we have \"freedom from external
constraint,\" that we don\'t feel we are being forced into behaving as
we do. We behave under the idea of freedom, and that is enough to ensure
that our judgments are made freely.

**Fifth Meditation: \"The essence of material things, and the existence
of God considered a second time\"&nbsp;**

**Summary&nbsp;**

The Fifth Meditation opens with the Meditator turning his attention
toward material objects. Rather than inquire into the things themselves,
he inquires into her ideas regarding material things. He concludes that
he can distinctly imagine extension, size, shape, position, and local
motion, which is associated with duration.&nbsp;

The Meditator also considers that there are abstract geometrical objects
which do not exist in the material world, do not depend on her mind, yet
are not nothing. For instance, there are no triangles in the world, yet
they have some kind of being. [Even if no triangle has ever existed
anywhere outside the mind of the Meditator, triangles still have a
determinate essence which is independent of the Meditator\'s mind]{.ul}.
The Meditator also denies that he has come to know the nature of
triangles through the senses. After all, he can think up all sorts of
shapes that he has never seen and derive their properties as clearly and
distinctly as he does with those of the triangle.

These properties must all be true since the Meditator clearly and
distinctly perceives them. Besides, he notes, even before he began to
doubt, he always regarded mathematical and geometrical objects as more
certain than the objects of the senses.&nbsp;

The Meditator has reasoned that a triangle must have all the properties
he ascribes to it, because the triangle exists as an idea in his mind
and he clearly and distinctly perceives all these properties. **He then
reasons by analogy that God exists as an idea in his mind and he clearly
and distinctly perceives all of his qualities**. One of these qualities
is existence, so it follows from his clear and distinct perception that
God must exist. **If existence is the essence of God, then God would not
be God if he did not exist, just as a triangle would not be a triangle
if it were not three-sided**. At the very least, then, the existence of
God must be as certain as the properties of mathematical and geometrical
objects since he can prove them in the same way.&nbsp;

Clear and distinct perceptions are always convincing, according to the
Meditator. Some perceptions may be evident, like the fact that a
triangle has three sides, and some may take more thought, like the
Pythagorean theorem that states that the sum of the squares of the legs
of a right triangle is equal to the square of the hypotenuse. But once
the Pythagorean theorem is proved, it is just as certain as any other
clear and distinct perception.

**Similarly with God: his existence would immediately be perceived
clearly and distinctly if it weren\'t for the confusions caused by the
senses and preconceived opinions. Now that God\'s existence has been
established, it is as certain as any other clear and distinct
perception**.&nbsp;

The Meditator asserts that God is the guarantor of his clear and
distinct perceptions. [He admits that he cannot constantly fix his
mental vision on any particular perception, so that there might be times
when he is not clearly and distinctly perceiving a certain truth]{.ul}.
At such times, doubt could creep in, if not for God.

Because he knows that God is not deceiving him and has endowed him with
a faultless understanding and a will then cannot but assent to clear and
distinct perceptions, he knows that what he clearly and distinctly
perceived in the past is and remains true even if he is not currently
directing his mental vision toward it.

Those judgments about which he is mistaken are not clearly and
distinctly perceived by the intellect. And even if he is dreaming, as
was suggested in the First Meditation, he cannot be mistaken with
respect to a clear and distinct perception.&nbsp;

**Analysis&nbsp;**

\"Essence\" is one of those philosophical terms thats currency has waned
a bit since the seventeenth century. The essence of a thing is the
property or set of properties that the thing cannot do without. For
instance, Aristotle defines rationality as an essential characteristic
of a human being. A person could lose a leg and still be human, but a
person could not cease to be rational and remain human.

Descartes\' discussion of essence is intended as a strong reaction
against Aristotelian empiricism. According to Aristotle, we learn the
essence of, say, a triangle, by examining instances of triangular-shaped
objects in the world and extracting the essence of triangles from these
worldly instances.

Descartes turns this formulation on its head, saying that we learn the
essence of a triangle solely through the intellect, and only afterward
do we look at the real world and see if there are instances of
triangles.

In Descartes\' formulation, whatever properties of a thing that we
clearly and distinctly perceive must be essential. Thus, bodies are
essentially extended, since extension is clearly and distinctly
perceived by the intellect prior to any empirical investigation. The
essence of body will be further discussed in the Sixth Meditation.&nbsp;

Descartes provides strong reasons to support his move against Aristotle.
If essences are extracted from the real world, how is it that we
understand perfect triangles when there are none? And more importantly,
how do we understand abstract shapes that we have derived mathematically
but have never encountered in the real world? In Aristotle\'s defense,
however, we could point out that while Descartes has given us a better
understanding of the essences of mathematical objects, he has left us
completely in the dark as to how we can know the essence of material
things.

Is it possible to apply the intellect to understanding the essence of,
say, gold, without ever encountering gold in the world?&nbsp;

Descartes then turns his discussion of essence toward a second proof of
God\'s existence. This proof is weaker than the one found in the Third
Meditation, and we might wonder why he adds it. Is he not certain that
his earlier proof is satisfactory? And if so, what holes does this new
proof patch up? Most importantly, it reinforces the connection between
God and clear and distinct perceptions.

Clear and distinct perceptions are made certain because God exists, and
God\'s existence, as an essential property, is clearly and distinctly
perceived. Of course, this reinforced connection only reinforces the
conundrum of the Cartesian Circle. This problem is discussed in the
commentary to the Third Meditation, Part 3.&nbsp;

The proof of God\'s existence found here is a version of a proof that
was popular among the Scholastic philosophers. **Our idea of God is the
idea of a perfect being, and one of the attributes of a perfect being
would be existence, since it is more perfect to exist than not to
exist**. In Descartes\' formulation, existence is not just an attribute,
but an **essential property of God\'s**, so that God cannot be conceived
of without existence. [This proof, however, rests on the faulty
assumption, first pointed out by Kant, that existence is a predicate or
a property, like \"being red\" or \"being tall.\"]{.ul} In fact,
\"exists\" is a very different kind of predicate than \"is red\" or \"is
tall.\" The predicate \"exists\" does not modify an object so much as it
modifies the world. If I say \"the red car exists,\" the property of
redness is something that modifies the car. On the other hand,
\"exists\" does not modify the car so much as it says that the world is
such that the car is in it. In that sense, \"exists\" is not a property
of the car\'s.

**Sixth Meditation, Part 1: Cartesian body&nbsp;**

**Summary&nbsp;**

The Sixth and final Meditation is entitled \"The existence of material
things, and the real distinction between mind and body,\" and it opens
with the Meditator considering the existence of material things. The
Meditator accepts the strong possibility that material objects exist
since they are the subject-matter of pure mathematics, the truths of
which he perceives clearly and distinctly. He then produces two
arguments for the existence of material things, one based on the faculty
of the imagination, the other based on the senses.&nbsp;

-   He first distinguishes between imagination and pure understanding.
    In the case of a triangle, he can perceive that a triangle is
    three-sided and derive all sorts of other properties using the
    understanding alone.\
    He can also perceive these properties with the imagination, by
    picturing the triangle in his mind\'s eye.

-   However, the weaknesses of the imagination become clear when he
    considers a thousand-sided figure. It is very difficult to picture
    it in his mind\'s eye, and more difficult still to differentiate
    that mental image from the mental image of a 999-sided figure. The
    pure understanding, however, dealing only in mathematical relations,
    can perceive all the properties of a thousand-sided figure just as
    easily as it can a triangle.&nbsp;

-   The imagination cannot be an essential property of his mind, since
    the Meditator could still exist even if he could not imagine.
    Therefore, the imagination must rely on something other than the
    mind for its existence.

The Meditator conjectures that the imagination is connected with the
body, and thus allows the mind to picture corporeal objects. In
understanding, the mind turns inward upon itself, and in imagining, the
mind turns outward toward the body. The Meditator admits that this is
only a strong conjecture, and not a definitive proof of the existence of
body.&nbsp;

The Meditator then turns to reflect on what he perceives by means of the
senses. He perceives he has a body that exists in a world, and that this
body can experience pleasure, pain, emotion, hunger, etc., and can
perceive other bodies with extension, shape, movement, hardness, heat,
color, smell, taste, etc. He thinks it not unreasonable to suppose that
these perceptions all come from some outside source. They come to him
involuntarily, and they are so much more vivid than the perceptions he
consciously creates in his own mind.

It would be odd to suggest that he can involuntarily create perceptions
so much more vivid than the ones he creates voluntarily. And if they
come from without, it is only natural to suppose that the source of
these sensory ideas in some way resemble the ideas themselves. From this
point of view, it is very easy to convince oneself that all knowledge
comes from without via the senses.&nbsp;

**Analysis&nbsp;**

What Descartes understands by \"body\" is somewhat counter-intuitive and
is closely linked to his physics, which is not made readily apparent in
the&nbsp;*Meditations.*&nbsp;This section of commentary will depart a
bit from the text it comments on in order to clarify some concepts of
Cartesian physics.&nbsp;

The entirety of Cartesian physics rests on the claim that extension is
the primary attribute of body, and that nothing more is needed to
explain or understand body. \"Extension\" means extended in space, and
so a body is anything that occupies space. We should recall that
Descartes was also a great mathematician, and invented both analytic
geometry and the coordinate system that now bears his name. Descartes\'
physics is highly mathematical, and we should understand bodies as
anything that could be graphed in coordinate space.

 Sixth Meditation, Part 2: Mind-body dualism&nbsp;
-------------------------------------------------

### Summary&nbsp; {#summary}

The Meditator muses that he has been puzzled as to why his mind seems
particularly attached to one particular body, which he calls his own.
Why does he feel pain and tickling in this body but not in any body
external to it? And why should a tugging in the stomach of that body
suggest to his mind that he should eat, since there is no obvious
connection between the tugging and the decision to eat?

He concludes that he is inclined by nature to assume the things he does
about his body and about the world external to it, since he accepts
these assumptions prior to developing any arguments regarding
them.&nbsp;

Having questioned these assumptions in the First Meditation, he finds
that there is plenty of reason to doubt that material things are the way
he is naturally inclined to assume they are. However, he believes he is
now well enough equipped that he needn\'t doubt their existence
entirely.

First, he clearly and distinctly perceives that he is, in essence, only
a thinking thing. Body is essentially extended and mind is non-extended,
so he can conclude that he really is distinct from his body and could
exist without it.&nbsp;

The Meditator reasons that imagination and sensory perception are modes
of thought. He could conceive of himself without imagination or sensory
perception, so they are not essential to him, but imagination and
sensory perception could not exist without a mind to contain them.
Similarly, there are modes of extension that cannot exist without a body
to contain them.&nbsp;

Sensory perception is a passive faculty, and, as the Meditator has
asserted before, there must be some active cause that creates sensory
perceptions and this cause must reside outside of him. Either it could
be other bodies with as much formal reality as the sensory perceptions
have objective reality or it could be God or some other being capable of
creating these perceptions.

The Meditator is naturally inclined to suppose that sensory perceptions
are created by things which resemble those perceptions, and he would be
deceived if the perceptions were caused by some other means.

Since God is no deceiver, God would not have misled the Meditator into
thinking there are material objects if there were not, so the Meditator
concludes that material objects must exist.

His perception of most properties of material objects is confused and
obscure, so his perception of them might not be perfect, but he can at
least be certain of those properties that he perceives clearly and
distinctly.&nbsp;

The Meditator next considers those ideas about body that he perceives
only confusedly and obscurely, hoping that his knowledge that God is not
a deceiver will help him further.

First, he reasons that he must have a body, as nature teaches that to
him more vividly than anything.

Further, mind and body are intermingled to form one unit. If the mind
were in the body like a sailor in a ship, he would be able to perceive
pains and hungers by purely intellectual understanding. Instead, he
feels these sensations sharply and directly as if his mind itself were
suffering.

The confused modes of thinking that arise with respect to these
sensations result precisely because the mind and body are intermingled
and the mind cannot survey the matter disinterestedly.

&nbsp;

### Analysis&nbsp; {#analysis}

This section concludes the Meditator\'s argument by means of the senses
for the existence of body. Sensory perceptions must either be created by
the Meditator himself, by someone or something else, or by God. The
Meditator can rule himself out since he is not aware of creating these
perceptions, and they come upon him so forcefully and involuntarily that
it would be inconceivable that he could be the creative force behind
them. This is proof enough that sensory perceptions have some outside
cause.

He is naturally inclined to think his sensory perceptions are caused by
things that resemble those perceptions. Since God is not a deceiver, he
must not be fooling him in giving him this natural inclination.
Therefore, he concludes, bodies must be something like what they seem to
be. This conclusion will be refined by the distinction between primary
and secondary qualities discussed in the next section.

The discussion of sensory perceptions as being \"caused\" by some
outside source marks an important turning point in the history of
Western philosophy. The mind is sharply distinguished from the world of
bodies around it. The Meditator argues that mind and body have nothing
in common, so they must be two totally distinct substances. We could
point out that Clark Kent and Superman are very dissimilar and are yet
the same thing, and so argue by analogy that mind and body might be two
very different ways of looking at the same thing. However, even the
primary attributes of mind and body are different.

Body is essentially extended, whereas mind is non-extended and
essentially thinking. Since the two are totally different, the Meditator
concludes that he is only mind, and not body. This is a step beyond what
is stated by the&nbsp;*sum res cogitans*&nbsp;in the Second Meditation,
as there the Meditator asserts that he only knows that he is a thinking
thing. Now he knows that he is only a thinking thing.&nbsp;

This sharp distinction between mind and body is called \"mind-body
dualism\" and has had tremendous impact on Western philosophy ever
since. If sensory experience is in the mind and the bodies that cause
our sensations are in the world, the question arises as to how the two
can causally interact.

What is the connection between mind and world?

This has been a great concern in particular for the rationalist
philosophers that followed Descartes\--Malebranche, Spinoza, and Leibniz
being the most important\--as well as for philosophy of mind in general
ever since.

When the mind and the world are held as totally distinct, the mind
becomes conceived of as being trapped within the body, unable to know
about the world except through a causal interface at the sensory
surfaces.

As mentioned in the commentary to the Second Meditation, Part 2, the
causal interface generated by mind-body dualism has only begun to be
questioned in the past hundred years.

Sixth Meditation, Part 3: Primary and secondary qualities&nbsp;
---------------------------------------------------------------

### Summary&nbsp; {#summary-1}

Though the Meditator can reach conclusions about his own body and also
conclude that there are other bodies which are the source of his many
sensory perceptions, there are certain claims about material things he
is not justified in making.

For instance, he cannot claim that the heat, color, and taste that he
perceives resides in that object in the same way as it is present to his
senses. Nature, as the combination of mind and body, teaches us to seek
out pleasure and avoid pain, among other things, but it does not teach
us to draw any conclusions about material objects based solely on
sensory perception.

Correct judgment in such matters depends on the intellect alone and not
the senses. It would be unreasonable to infer from the sensation of heat
or pain in approaching a flame that the heat or the pain reside in the
flame itself. The fact of the matter is that the senses are meant only
to inform us as to what is beneficial and what is harmful, and in that
respect they are perfectly clear and distinct. [Our mistake comes in
expecting them also to inform us of the true nature or essence of the
things we are perceiving, when they can only give us very obscure
information in this regard.&nbsp;]{.ul}

But we often make mistakes even with regard to what is harmful to us.
For instance, a sick person may crave food or water even if food or
water will only make him sicker. To begin answering this objection, the
Meditator notes that while body is divisible, mind is indivisible. While
we can break extended things into smaller parts, the mind can in no such
way be divided up.

There are different faculties of the mind: the imagination, the senses,
the will, the intellect, etc., but these are not different parts of the
mind. When the mind imagines, it is the whole mind that imagines, and
not some part of it. Since the mind is totally indivisible and bodies
can be easily divided, it is clear that the mind and body are two very
distinct things.

Further, there is only a small part of the body that can affect the
mind.

In Descartes\' day, it was thought that the pineal gland was the seat of
the \"common\" sense, which sends all sensory perceptions to the mind.
Thus, the Meditator concludes, only the pineal gland can send messages
from the body to the mind.

A sensation in another part of the body must then be transmitted through
the body to the pineal gland. Further, these transmissions must take
place by means of nervous signals that have a limited range of
expression. All these facts combine to suggest that sometimes the body
is incapable of sending the right message to the mind.&nbsp;

The Meditator concludes that, on the whole, he can be quite certain of
things that he had cast into doubt in the First Meditation. The senses
are normally quite adequate in helping us get around in the world, and
when in doubt, we can double-check our sensory perceptions with our
intellect or our memory.

The Meditator also notes that our memory can dispel the doubt presented
in the Dream Argument. Any waking experience can be connected through
memory to all other waking experiences, whereas in dreams, things happen
in a disconnected and somewhat random manner.

Since God is not a deceiver, the Meditator is safe from erroneous
judgment as long as he applies her mind carefully.&nbsp;

### Analysis&nbsp; {#analysis-1}

Descartes draws an important distinction between properties such as
heat, color, and taste on the one hand, and size, shape, and texture on
the other hand: the latter are primary qualities while the former are
secondary qualities. The Meditator can be certain with regard to the
primary qualities of a body since he can clearly and distinctly perceive
them. They are all geometric qualities and relate to the extension of a
body in space, which connects with its essence. On the other hand, the
Meditator can often be misled regarding secondary qualities because they
are non-geometric and can only be perceived obscurely and
confusedly.&nbsp;

Here it might be useful to draw a distinction between sensory and
intellectual perception. Sensory perception is perception using the
imagination, while intellectual perception uses the understanding. In
discussing a thousand-sided figure in the Sixth Meditation, Part 1, we
concluded that the imagination can only give us a confused and obscure
visual representation of geometrical figures whereas the intellect could
clearly and distinctly perceive the figure no matter how many sides it
has. Similarly, the intellect can grasp the primary qualities of body as
they all relate to extension. However, there is no clear way that we can
divorce secondary qualities from the imagination. I cannot easily think
of the color red without thinking of the visual appearance of red.&nbsp;

There are two major conflicting interpretations of how Descartes views
the ontology of secondary qualities. One is called sensationalism, and
suggests that secondary qualities exist exclusively in the mind and not
in any way in bodies. Secondary qualities do not represent anything in
the corporeal world, according to this interpretation, though they may
be caused by things in the world. Sensationalism seems then to imply
that when one perceives red, the mind is, in some sense, red. This claim
sounds very odd and it is not entirely clear how we are to make sense of
it.

The other interpretation is called physicalism, and suggests that
secondary qualities exist both in bodies and in the mind, but in very
different ways. Colors, for instance, manifest themselves in bodies as
surface textures which reflect light. We might feel uncomfortable
calling a surface texture a color, but the thrust of the physicalist
argument is not that secondary qualities are present in the bodies
themselves. Rather, the physicalist argument suggests that these surface
textures are what cause color sensations to be present in the
mind.&nbsp;

We should note that sensationalist and physicalist agree that secondary
qualities do not reside in material objects, but that they also agree
that secondary qualities are caused by objects. The debate is over what
precisely we are to call the color, taste, sound, etc. The
sensationalist wants to say that \"red\" is a sensation and the
physicalist wants to say that \"red\" is a surface texture.&nbsp;

We have already explained how we can use the imagination to have a
sensory perception of a primary quality and the intellect to have an
intellectual perception of the primary quality. Further, we know how we
can use the imagination to have a sensory perception of a secondary
quality. The question remains, however, as to what an intellectual
perception of a secondary quality would consist in. A physicalist would
suggest that the intellectual perception consists in perceiving the
surface texture of objects. This kind of perception can only give us an
indirect and confused understanding of the secondary qualities
themselves since surface texture is the cause of secondary qualities,
but not the secondary qualities themselves. A sensationalist would
suggest that we could understand a sensation as being a mode of the
mind, though it is less clear how a sensationalist would account for the
confused and obscure nature of secondary qualities.&nbsp;

Descartes concludes by giving a rather interesting account as to why our
senses can go wrong. Our intellect and our will are meant to judge what
is true and false, and they are well equipped for this task. Our senses,
however, are only meant to help us get by in the world, and thus are not
equipped for accurate judgment. The senses can give us good clues as to
what the world is like, but we should not use them as a tool for
pursuing the truth about the nature of body. That is a task best left to
the intellect.
