**Overall Analysis and Themes **

Bertrand Russell famously summarized Hume\'s contribution to philosophy,
saying that he \"developed to its logical conclusion the empiricist
philosophy of Locke and Berkeley, and by making it self-consistent made
it incredible.\" Hume is remarkable in that he does not shy away from
conclusions that might seem unlikely or unreasonable. Ultimately, he
concludes that we have no good reason to believe almost everything we
believe about the world, but that this is not such a bad thing. Nature
helps us to get by where reason lets us down. 

Hume is unquestionably an **empiricist philosopher**, and he strives to
bring the rigor of scientific methodology to bear on philosophical
reasoning.

His distinction between relations of ideas and matters of fact is
absolutely crucial in this respect.

-   Anything we can say about the world is a matter of fact, and thus
    can be justified only through experience and can be denied without
    contradiction.

-   Relations of ideas can teach us about mathematical truths, but
    cannot, as some rationalist philosophers would have (Descartes),
    teach us about the existence of our selves, an external world, or
    God. 

If we are left with only matters of fact to get us by in the world,
however, we find ourselves greatly limited.

How can past experience teach me anything about the future? Even to
infer without circularity that future experience will resemble past
experience requires some principle that cannot be grounded in past
experience. Without that principle, our ability to reason according to
cause and effect, and thus the greater part of our ability to reason
with matters of fact, is sharply curtailed. 

We should be careful to note the tone Hume\'s skepticism takes here,
however. Rather than conclude that we *cannot know* anything about
future events or the external world, he concludes that we are *not
rationally justified* in believing the things we do. Hume does not deny
that we make certain inferences based on causal reasoning, and indeed
insists that we would be unable to live if we didn\'t do so. His point
is simply that we are mistaken if we think that these inferences are in
any way justified by reason. That is, there are no grounds for certainty
or proof of these inferences. 

Hume is a **naturalist because he suggests that nature, and not reason,
leads us to believe the things we do**. Habit has taught us that we are
safe in making certain inferences and believing certain things, and so
we don\'t normally worry about them too much. We cannot *prove* that
there is a world external to our senses, but it seems to be a relatively
safe assumption by which to live. Rather than try to justify our beliefs
or identify the truth, Hume seeks simply to explain why we believe what
we believe. 

The *Enquiry* is decidedly **a book about epistemology** and not about
metaphysics. That is, Hume is concerned about what and how we know, and
not at all about what is actually the case. For instance, he does not
deal with the question of whether there actually are necessary
connections between events, he simply asserts that we cannot perceive
them. Or perhaps more accurately, Hume argues that, because we cannot
perceive necessary connections between events, the question of whether
or not they actually exist is irrelevant and meaningless.

Hume is an ardent opponent of rationalist metaphysics, which seeks to
answer questions such as whether or not God exists, what the nature or
matter and soul is, or whether the soul is immortal. The mind, according
to Hume, is not a truth-tracking device, and we misuse it if we think it
can bring us to metaphysical conclusions. A Humean science of the mind
can describe how the mind works and why it reaches the conclusions it
does, but it cannot take us beyond the confines of our own, natural,
reason.

**Section I **

**Summary **

Hume opens the *Enquiry* by drawing a distinction between two kinds of
philosophical thinking.

-   The first he calls an \"easy and obvious philosophy\" which serves
    as a guide for the man of action. Usually written in an elegant and
    poetic style, this philosophy tries to cultivate our manners by
    drawing on examples from common life and making us feel the
    difference between vice and virtue. This philosophy excites the
    sentiments and leads us to assent to a way of life that we know to
    be good. Such philosophy\--which Hume associates with figures such
    as Cicero, La Bruyere, and Addison\--is generally quite popular and
    keeps good standing in posterity. It follows from common sense and
    thus rarely falls into error. 

-   This philosophy is contrasted with the \"accurate and abstract
    philosophy\" of the man of reason. Rather than direct our behavior,
    this philosophy seeks to form our understanding and to uncover the
    principles that govern our behavior. Rather than rely upon common
    sense, this philosophy\--which Hume associates with figures such as
    Aristotle, Malebranche, and Locke\--proceeds by means of abstract
    reasoning from the particular to the general. This kind of
    philosophy has little application once one leaves off philosophical
    contemplation. Because its reasoning and conclusions often go
    against common sense, error in this field is not at all uncommon,
    and as a result it fares rather poorly in posterity and is sometimes
    rejected altogether. Common wisdom suggests that this accurate and
    abstract philosophy is not to be disregarded entirely, but that a
    good life consists in an appropriate mix of different elements.

The philosopher is often looked down upon for being too shut off from
the world outside, but those who ignore philosophy entirely are even
more despised for their ignorance.

We are reasonable beings, and thus aspire to scientific knowledge, but
this knowledge is limited.

We are also social and active beings, though a purely social life can
become tiresome and a life devoted purely to business and action can
wear us out.

The \"easy and obvious\" philosophy, then, is often considered an ideal
that appropriately combines philosophical reflection with a more active
and social life. A life dedicated only to the pursuit of scientific
knowledge is usually punished with pensive melancholy, uncertainty, and
public disapprobation. 

Nonetheless, Hume argues that a careful study of this accurate and
abstract philosophy has its virtues. It calls for an exactness and
accuracy that can lead to perfection in more practical matters. For
instance, the scientific study of anatomy may seem grotesque in itself,
but a painter can create beautiful and anatomically precise figures
through careful application of its principles. Besides, Hume remarks, on
its own, such scientific study is harmless, is good exercise for the
mind, and can help bring us to the truth. 

The best objection Hume admits against accurate and abstract philosophy
is that it is not science, but rather a confused attempt to explain by
means of blind prejudice what we do not know. However, Hume notes, this
is not a reason to abandon philosophy, but an exhortation to study it
more carefully. If we can properly explain the nature and principles
that govern human understanding, as Newton has done for the principles
that govern planetary orbits, we can reject bad reasoning and proceed
more carefully.

Though the mental faculties are most present to us, they are very
difficult to conceive of precisely and we are still far from uncovering
the fundamental principles that we seek. Still, this is only further
reason to study them, and while we can often make mistakes through
faulty reasoning, this fallibility is hardly just cause to abandon the
project altogether.

### Commentary 

This first section lays out the framework of Hume\'s project. He is
clearly greatly influenced by the scientific method and empirical
philosophy. His stated goal is to do for the mind what Newton has done
for matter. Before Newton, we could explain a great deal about planetary
orbits and even predict how and where things would move. However, until
Newton, we were unable to explain *why* the planets move as they do.
Newton\'s theory of gravitation gives a clear and simple explanation as
to why the planets orbit the sun and why objects on the earth fall
toward its center. Hume believes our explanations of human understanding
and behavior are in a state similar to that of pre- Newtonian astronomy.
We can observe a great deal about how we think and can often reason
quite fruitfully, but as yet we have no clear grasp of the principles
that underlie our thought and reasoning.

**Hume\'s stated method is scientific, of careful observation and
inference from particular instances to general principles**. The drive
of scientific inquiry is to dig deeper and deeper so as to uncover a
very few, very simple principles that govern all the complexities that
we observe. Newton\'s genius gives us three very simple laws that can
explain and predict all physical phenomena. Hume wishes to perform a
similar feat for human understanding (the word \"understanding\" is used
by Hume to describe most broadly the several faculties of human reason).
[The hope is that Hume will derive a similarly small and simple number
of principles that can explain and predict the processes of human
thought.]{.ul} **His method will be to proceed from simple observation
of how the mind works and how we use it in everyday life, and to infer
from his observations increasingly general principles that govern our
understanding until he reaches a bedrock of simplicity and clarity. **

In this respect, **Hume follows very much in the empiricist vein of
philosophy and owes a large debt to** \#\#**John Locke**\#\#. Locke
moved against rationalist philosophy, best exemplified by
\#\#Descartes\#\#, which relies heavily upon rational intuition. **The
empiricist tradition asserts that experience, and not reason, should
serve as the basis of philosophical reasoning**. 

The motivation for Hume\'s project is made apparent in his complaint
that the \"accurate and abstract\" metaphysics that he is pursuing is
frequently looked down upon and disdained[. The difficulty and
counter-intuitive nature of these inquiries often lead to errors that
may seem absurd and prejudicial to future generations]{.ul}. [Even
today, there is a great deal of debate as to whether there has been any
real \"progress\" in philosophy: we may have refined our discussions and
dismissed some bad ideas, but in essence we are still mulling over the
same problems that concerned Plato and Aristotle]{.ul}. It would not be
unreasonable to suggest that we are no nearer a satisfactory and final
answer than the ancient Greeks. **Hume hopes that scientific observation
can uncover the principles that underlie our reasoning so that we can be
more immediately aware of faulty logic and more easily guided along the
correct path**. 

Ever since the scientific revolution of Newton, Galileo, and others,
science has been held up as a paradigm of fruitful reasoning[. In
science, there is a carefully defined methodology that precisely details
how we can test a theory and determine whether it is right or wrong.
Though it is often difficult to determine the right answer, the
scientific method usually prevents us from arriving at answers that are
far from the mark]{.ul}.

Philosophy lacks any such determinate method, and philosophers are
continually taking up conflicting views. For instance, Hume\'s emphasis
on observation goes directly **against Descartes\' rationalism**, which
disparages observation in favor of pure reason. Hume hopes that his
empiricism will open the way for a carefully defined method that will
not allow for such disparity amongst philosophers. 

Hume also suggests that his work must be epistemically (*epistemic:* of,
relating to, or involving knowledge; cognitive) prior to the new science
that he so lauds.

The scientific method is a product of careful reasoning, and is thus
subject to the laws of human understanding. While science seems to be in
far better shape than philosophy, it too can benefit from his work. In
this way, Hume differs from his predecessor, Locke.

Locke sees himself as laboring on behalf of the new science, clearing
away some of the linguistic rubble that might lead to confusion. While
Locke humbly sees himself as simply clearing a path for science, Hume
believes that his own work must lay the groundwork upon which science
can rest. **If he can uncover the precise laws that govern our reasoning
and inferences, this should help us draw the right conclusions in our
scientific investigations.**

**Sections II and III **

**Summary **

Hume draws a distinction between impressions and thoughts or ideas (for
the sake of consistency, we will refer only to \"ideas\" from here on).

-   Impressions are lively and vivid perceptions, while ideas are drawn
    from memory or the imagination and are thus less lively and vivid.

-   Impressions comprehend, according to Hume, \"all our more lively
    perceptions, when we hear, or see, or feel, or love, or hate, or
    desire, or will.\" Thus, both the color red and the feeling of anger
    are considered impressions. Ideas are what arise when we reflect
    upon our impressions, so the memory of seeing the color red or a
    thought about anger are considered ideas. 

While we might consider the human mind an unlimited organ, able to
conceive of imaginary creatures and far-off lands with great facility,
Hume points out that our imagination in fact consists merely of a
complex of ideas. For instance, if we imagine a gold mountain, we are
compounding our idea of gold with our idea of a mountain. Hume provides
two arguments to support this claim.

1.  First, he suggests that all complex ideas are compounded out of
    simple ideas, which are in turn derived from simple impressions. For
    instance, our idea of God as supremely good and intelligent comes
    from taking our simple ideas of human goodness and intelligence and
    augmenting them without limit.

2.  Second, he points out that our imagination is limited to those ideas
    of which we have had impressions. Thus, a blind man is unable to
    imagine colors, a deaf man to imagine sounds, or a mild-mannered man
    to imagine cruelty. 

Hume admits **one objection** to his distinction. He points out that I
can imagine certain colors without ever having perceived them. For
instance, if I have seen several shades of blue, I might be able to
imagine some other shade of blue that falls between them. Though he has
no answer to this objection, he remarks that the counter-example is so
singular that is does not upset his general maxim. 

This distinction between impressions and ideas is valuable for clearing
up our philosophical vocabulary.

-   While ideas are faint, obscure, and easily confounded with other
    ideas, impressions are vivid and clearly defined, and we are not
    likely to fall into error with respect to them.

-   Thus, when we find ourselves discussing a philosophical term that we
    suspect may not refer to any idea, we may simply ask from what
    impression its supposed idea might be derived. Since all ideas are
    derived from impressions, a term that is not connected to any
    impression is meaningless. 

Critic to Locke's definitions of "innate" and "idea"

In a footnote, Hume notes that his distinction between impressions and
ideas clears up some confusions found in Locke\'s rejection of innate
ideas. Hume complains that Locke fails to clarify what he means either
by \"innate\" or \"idea.\" In Hume\'s vocabulary, we could assert that
impressions are innate and ideas are not. 

In section III, Hume discusses the connections that exist between ideas,
asserting that all ideas are linked to other ideas. **Hume lays out
three principles by which ideas might be associated**:

-   Resemblance (where a picture of a tree might make us think of the
    tree)

-   Contiguity in time or place (where mention of one apartment might
    lead us to discuss others)

-   Cause and effect (where the thought of a wound makes us think of the
    pain that follows from it).

Hume admits that he has no reason for laying out only these three
principles except that he cannot think of any others that would be
needed. For instance, association by means of contrast or contrariety
can be seen as a combination of resemblance and causation. 

### 

### 

### 

### 

### 

### 

### Commentary  {#commentary}

Here we begin to see Hume\'s empirical method at work. By looking inward
and observing his own mental processes, Hume brings to bear three
important distinctions.

1.  The first, and most important, is **the distinction between ideas
    and impressions**. This distinction is original to Hume and solves a
    number of difficulties encountered by Locke. A proper discussion of
    Hume\'s footnote would take us too far afield, but we should remark
    that Hume\'s criticism of Locke is exact and powerful.\
    The distinction between impressions and ideas might seem quite
    obvious and of no great importance, but Hume is quite clever to
    identify the full importance of this distinction. [An empirical
    philosophy asserts that all knowledge comes from experience]{.ul}.
    **For Hume, this would suggest that all knowledge comes from
    impressions, and so ideas are set up as secondary to impressions. **

2.  The second distinction, between **complex and simple impressions or
    ideas**, helps draw out further the power of the first distinction.
    A simple impression might be seeing the color red, while a complex
    impression might be seeing the totality of what I see right now. A
    simple idea might be the memory of being angry while a complex idea
    might be the idea of a unicorn (composed of the idea of a horse and
    the idea of a horn). **Complex ideas and impressions are compounded
    out of the simple ones.**\
    \
    With these first two distinctions, [Hume is creating a hierarchy of
    mental phenomena]{.ul}. Since the complex is compounded out of the
    simple and ideas are derived from impressions, **everything in our
    mind is based ultimately upon simple impressions**. A complex idea
    is compounded out of several simple ideas, which are in turn derived
    from several corresponding simple impressions.\
    Hume thus suggests that a term can only be meaningful if it can be
    **connected with an idea that we can associate with some simple
    impressions**. Hume, we should note, is silently implying that every
    term must be connected with some idea.\
    \
    \*\*\*[In the eighteenth century the philosophy of language had not
    yet flourished, and it was not clear how difficult it might be to
    determine precisely how words, ideas, and reality link up]{.ul}.
    Hume\'s suggestion that all terms can be analyzed into simple
    impressions anticipates Russell, who argues that we can analyze all
    terms into simple demonstratives like \"this\" or \"that.\" Hume\'s
    suggestion comprehends a picture of language according to which the
    words we use are a complex and opaque expression of a simpler
    underlying language which proper analysis can bring out.\*\*\*

3.  **The third distinction is the three laws of association**[. If the
    previous two distinctions give us a geography of the mind,
    describing its different faculties]{.ul}, this distinction gives us
    a dynamics of the mind, explaining its movement. **According to
    Hume, any given thought is somehow related to adjacent thoughts just
    as any given movement in the physical world is somehow related to
    adjacent moving bodies**. His three laws of association, then, might
    be seen as equivalent to Newton\'s three laws of motion. With them,
    Hume hopes to have described fully the dynamics of the mind. 

**Objections**

There are a number of objections we might want to raise to Hume\'s
distinctions and the way they are introduced, but we will touch on only
a few briefly.

1.  First, we might ask how strictly we can distinguish between
    impressions. Hume argues that ideas can be vague, but that
    impressions are exact and that the boundaries between them are
    clearly defined. Is the boundary between the impression of a 57\"
    stick and a 58\" stick that clearly defined? **There is some level
    of vagueness in our impressions that Hume does not acknowledge**. We
    could also point out that while we are experienced in distinguishing
    colors, we are not so good with some other sensations. For instance,
    we often have trouble distinguishing between tastes. 

2.  Second, we might object to **Hume\'s implicit philosophy of
    language**. It seems closely linked to the idea that simple
    impressions are clearly defined and infallible. **It is far from
    clear**, however, **why it should be desirable or possible to reduce
    all our language to simple impressions**. What, we might ask, is the
    simple impression from which is derived the word \"sake,\" for
    example?

3.  Third, we might ask Hume to be clearer in his distinctions. For
    instance, **are dream images impressions or ideas?** Most likely
    they are ideas, since they consist of a mixture of imagination and
    memory. [However, dreams are (arguably) phenomenally
    indistinguishable from waking experience: we cannot prove that we
    are dreaming from within a dream]{.ul}. Thus, all our impressions
    from within a dream are as real to us as we dream them as waking
    impressions are to us when we experience them.

**Section IV **

**Summary **

Hume opens this section by drawing a distinction between \"relations of
ideas\" and \"matters of fact.\"

-   Relations of ideas are **a priori** and indestructible bonds created
    between ideas. [All logically true statements]{.ul} such as \"5 + 7
    = 12\" and \"all bachelors are unmarried\" [are relations of
    ideas]{.ul}. Relations of ideas are intuitively or demonstrably
    certain, and a denial of such a proposition implies a
    contradiction. 

-   Matters of fact deal with experience: that the sun is shining, that
    yesterday I went for a walk, or that it will rain tomorrow are all
    matters of fact. They are learned **a posteriori** [and can be
    denied without fear of contradiction]{.ul}. If it is sunny outside
    and I assert that it is raining, I can only be proven wrong by
    looking out the window and checking: my assertion cannot be
    disproved simply by an appeal to logic and reason. While I may know
    many matters of fact from sensory experience or from memory, neither
    is the source of my knowledge that my friend is in France or that
    the sun will rise tomorrow**. Hume suggests that we know matters of
    fact about unobserved things through a process of cause and
    effect**. My knowledge that my friend is in France might have been
    caused by a letter to that effect, and my knowledge that the sun
    will rise tomorrow [is inferred from past experience]{.ul}, which
    tells me that the sun has risen every day in the past. 

**Hume then asks how we know the principle of cause and effect**: if I
see one billiard ball rolling toward another, how do I know that the
second ball will move when it is struck? He suggests that [this
knowledge cannot be a priori]{.ul}, since I can deny that the second
billiard ball will move without contradiction. **Cause and effect are
themselves totally distinct**: nothing in the movement of the first
billiard ball can a priori suggest to me the movement of the second
billiard ball. Hume thus concludes that our knowledge of cause and
effect must be based on experience. ***From observed phenomena in the
past we infer as yet unobserved phenomena in the future.*** 

We base our knowledge of future events in past experience, but how do we
know that the past is a good guide for future predictions? Hume
distinguishes between

-   \"demonstrative reasoning,\" which is **based** on **relations of
    ideas**. We cannot know that the future will resemble the past by
    means of demonstrative reasoning, since there is no contradiction in
    suggesting that the future will not resemble the past. (Like
    Deduction)

-   \"moral reasoning,\" which is **based** **on matters of fact**.
    Moral reasoning is also unhelpful, since it falls into a vicious
    circle. **If all our predictions about the future are based on this
    principle** (that the future will resemble the past and that
    principle is derived from past experience) **we cannot know that it
    will remain true in the future except by assuming that principle
    from the outset.** (Like Induction)

**Hume suggests that we infer similarities between past and future but
that there is no form of reasoning that can confirm these inferences**.
He confesses that he may simply have failed to identify an argument that
could give a rational foundation for causal reasoning, but he challenges
the reader to identify it.

Even a child knows from past experience that a flame will burn. If this
knowledge comes from some form of reasoning, it must be a form of
reasoning so obvious that even a child can grasp it.

Why, then, Hume asks, is it so difficult to identify?

He suggests that the child learns, not through reasoning, but through
the conditioning of custom.

###  {#section}

###  {#section-1}

###  {#section-2}

###  {#section-3}

###  {#section-4}

### Commentary  {#commentary}

Hume\'s distinction between relations of ideas and matters of fact is
one of the first formulations of a distinction that has been
instrumental in philosophy ever since.

Kant made the distinction famous, calling relations of ideas
\"analytic\" and matters of fact \"synthetic.\" Ever since, and
particularly in the development of analytic philosophy in the twentieth
century, the analytic/synthetic distinction has been a hot topic of
debate. 

It might not be clear what Hume means when he says it would be a
contradiction to deny relations of ideas, but not matters of fact.
Surely, there is something contradictory about saying \"it\'s raining\"
when the sun is shining brightly. The point is that we need to refer to
the world around us to verify matters of fact. The claim that two plus
two equals five is a contradiction because nothing in our experience can
possibly prove it true. The claim \"it\'s raining\" might have been true
under other circumstances, and the claim must be compared with reality
in order to be proven false. 

-   **We can know relations of ideas quite easily by means of what Hume
    calls demonstrative reasoning**. There are well-established axioms
    and rules of inference according to which I can derive mathematical
    and other logical truths.

-   Similarly, there are well-established means of knowing observable
    matters of fact. For instance, my claim that it\'s raining can be
    verified by stepping outside or looking out the window.

However, Hume notes that unobserved matters of fact are more difficult
to sort out. I know that the sun will rise tomorrow, but how? I won\'t
be able to verify that claim directly until tomorrow, but I can still
claim to know it with certainty today. 

**Hume suggests that we use the principle of cause and effect to reason
through matters of fact**. The principle of cause and effect, he
suggests, we learn from experience. The question, then, is *[how we can
ground general principles that we learn from experience?]{.ul}*.

This question cuts right to the very heart of the inductive reasoning
that is central both to the scientific method and to Hume\'s philosophy.
All our general principles in philosophy and science are induced from
particular examples.

Induction essentially consists in observing and predicting the future
based on what we have observed in the past. We are absolutely certain
that the second billiard ball will move when it is struck, not through
demonstrative reasoning, but because we have seen bodies collide in that
way countless times during our lives and have never seen one instance to
the contrary. 

[For induction to be a valid form of reasoning, we need to propose some
sort of \"uniformity principle\"]{.ul} [that establishes that the future
will resemble the past]{.ul}. It may seem obvious that physical laws
will not change in the future, but Hume\'s genius lies precisely in
seeing that this is still a claim that needs to be proved and argued
for.

To his surprise, he finds there is no good reason to trust in any sort
of uniformity principle. It cannot be established through reason alone,
since its denial is hardly contradictory. It would seem that we learn of
this principle through experience, but we cannot claim that it is
confirmed in experience.

**A uniformity principle is needed to justify all inductive claims based
on past experience, so we cannot prove the uniformity principle itself
through induction.** **We need to prove the uniformity principle before
we can say anything about induction or knowledge from experience, but it
seems that** **we cannot prove the uniformity principle without an
appeal to experience.**

This circularity could be schematized as follows: 

1.  Our knowledge from experience is based on the principle of cause and
    effect

2.  The principle of cause and effect is grounded in induction

3.  Induction relies on the uniformity principle, that the future will
    resemble the past

4.  We come to know the uniformity principle from experience

If we ask how we ground our knowledge from experience (and hence the
uniformity principle) we return to (1) and our reasoning has come full
circle. 

Rather than try to hedge at this point, Hume bites the bullet and
accepts the consequences of his reasoning**: there is no way we can
prove any kind of uniformity principle, and so induction is not a valid
form of reasoning**.

-   Any reasoning about future events is mere conjecture and the claim
    that the sun will rise tomorrow is no more certain than the claim
    that aliens will invade the earth tomorrow.

Hume is not necessarily claiming that there is no uniformity principle
or that there is a good chance that the sun will not rise tomorrow.

He is saying that if there is some hidden power that enforces a
continued regularity in physical laws, it is beyond the power of our
reason to detect it. **Our belief in induction is not based in reason
but simply in custom**. Past experience has led us to believe certain
things about future events (and indeed, this experience rarely leads us
astray) but these beliefs are not rationally justified.

Hume\'s argument is that we are committed to the belief that the future
will resemble the past, but that we are not rationally justified in
holding this belief. Reason is a far weaker tool than we might have
supposed.

**\
Section V **

**Summary **

Hume acknowledges that the skepticism employed in the previous section
could never undermine our reasoning from common life: nature always wins
out against abstract reasoning. However[, he does claim to have shown
that there is a step in our reasoning from experience that is **not
supported** **by any argument or process of understanding**]{.ul}. There
is no solid reason why we should reason according to cause and effect,
and yet we never fail to do so. 

**Inductive Reasoning**

Hume notes that someone thrown into the world with no prior experience
would have no understanding of the process of cause and effect. Life
would be an unintelligible string of unconnected events. **We cannot
sense causation**, **nor** (as Hume has argued in the previous section)
**is it present to our reason**.

[Hume\'s answer is that our inductive reasoning regarding experience is
derived from custom]{.ul} and not from the understanding. This is why
**we need to see a process recur many times before we can begin to see
two events in the process as causally connected**. I need only examine
the diagram of one circle in order to derive through reason the
properties that all circles share in common. However, [we must see
many]{.ul} collisions of billiard balls and other [objects before custom
can implant in us the inference that]{.ul} the movement of one object is
causally connected to the movement of another. 

**Custom**

Without custom, Hume remarks, reasoning that concerns matters of fact
could not extend beyond memory and present sense experience. **We could
not speculate nor even act if custom had not implanted in us the ability
to see certain actions as having certain consequences**.

**Impressions and Induction**

Nonetheless, Hume points out, all reasoning from experience ultimately
falls back upon simple impressions. What I know about past ages might
come from reading a history book, or what I speculate about the future
might ultimately fall back upon observations I am making in the present.
**Our speculations about unobserved matters of fact rest upon a constant
conjunction with our present impressions**. 

**Inferences by means of imagination**\[Solution to excessive skepticism
in ordinary life\]

Hume suggests that we make inferences by means of the imagination, but
draws a careful distinction between fiction and belief.

-   Fiction is the product of [pure imagination]{.ul} by means of which
    we can conjure up all sorts of strange images derived from our
    simple impressions, such as unicorns, alien civilizations, and what
    have you.

-   Belief is a combination of [imagination and a certain
    sentiment]{.ul} that we cannot control that suggests to us that our
    imaginings correspond with reality.\
    The Process: When some memory or sense impression is present to our
    minds, the force of custom will then carry the imagination to think
    of something to which that impression is constantly conjoined. This
    force of custom forms our beliefs, and creates a more vivid,
    forceful, and firm version of our pure imaginings. **Cause and
    effect**, like the other two laws of association discussed in
    section III, **allow the mind to move from one thought to another**.
    **When these laws of association are led by custom, they form very
    strong instinctive beliefs**.

**Instinct**

Hume remarks that it is fitting that our knowledge of causation should
be formed by instinct rather than by reason.

It is very important that we see the world causally, since it is the
source of all action and speculation, and reason is too unreliable a
tool.

Young children have still unformed reasoning abilities, and even
intelligent adults commit countless errors in their reasoning. The
instincts enforced by custom are far less susceptible to error, and are
thus a far stronger means of securing our knowledge of cause and
effect. 

**Commentary **

**Skepticism**

The terms \"skepticism\" and \"naturalism\" are frequently mentioned in
discussions of Hume, and his relationship with each is hotly debated.

Hume is termed a skeptic on account of the doubts he raises as to the
capabilities of reason.

-   The [classic account of modern skepticism]{.ul} is found in
    [Descartes\' \#\#*Meditations*\#\#, in which all knowledge based on
    sensory experience is cast into doubt]{.ul}. We might read Hume as
    going even farther, casting our ability to reason inductively into
    doubt.

-   [Descartes ultimately squirms away from his doubts,]{.ul} Hume
    sticks to his, claiming that we have no rational justification for
    anything outside of immediate sensations and a priori reasoning.

**Is there a reason to act?**

Essentially, Hume doubts the rational foundation of everything that is
useful and helps us get by in the world. **All action and speculation is
based upon suppositions of cause and effect**.

**If I did not think my actions would have any consequences, I would not
act.** For instance, I go to work because I know I will get money if I
do so, and I help my friend because I know my friend will be better off
if I do so. If I had no reason to expect any consequences from my
actions, I would have no reason to go to work, to help my friend, or
anything else besides. 

Hume\'s line of skepticism cuts to the very heart of our conception of
ourselves as rational beings. He makes us question what we mean when we
say we do things for a reason. In fact, his argument seems to imply,
what we call our reasons are not reasons at all, or at least they are
not rationally justified. 

**Naturalism**

This brings us to the naturalist line in Hume\'s philosophy. While
**Hume denies that we have reasons for believing or acting as we do,**
he also explains the causes for our behavior and our actions.

**He argues that induction and causal reasoning are implanted in us by
custom and constant conjunction.** [In replacing reason with custom,
Hume reconceives the nature of human thought and action.]{.ul}

**Conception of Human Beings**

-   Most philosophy, in particular the rationalist philosophy of
    Descartes, sees human beings as primarily rational animals, informed
    and guided by reason.

-   Hume\'s reconception sees us more as creatures of custom and habit,
    much like the animals we so frequently try to set ourselves above. 

**Traditional Philosophy vs Hume (Principle of C/E and Custom)**

While Hume\'s discussion of custom and constant conjunction may seem odd
to us, it is in fact just another way of framing something that should
be relatively clear.

-   Both Hume and the traditional philosopher would agree that certain
    events invariably follow certain other events,

-   And, both Hume and the traditional philosopher would agree that our
    behavior is largely dictated by our knowledge of this sequence.

The difference lies in the fact that the traditional philosopher would
then argue that there is some principle of cause and effect that we know
and can see in operation between two connected events.

[Hume denies that we know any such principle, suggesting instead that
habit simply implants an expectation in us that events will fall out in
a certain pattern]{.ul}.

He uses the term **\"constant conjunction\"** to suggest that we cannot
say that two events are causally related, but only that **we constantly
find one followed by the other. **

**Limits of Reason and Science**

The harsh limitations that Hume sets upon reason might lead us to
question the validity of science and the scientific method that Hume
holds so dear.

An interesting and significant point is that only philosophy, and not
science, ever makes any claim regarding the certainty of causal
reasoning.

All scientific knowledge comes from experience, but science is also
careful never to assert the certainty of this knowledge.

For instance, Newton\'s three laws all come from induction:

-   he observes that certain events invariably follow upon one another,

-   and draws up laws to explain this constant conjunction.

However, all laws of physics are nothing more than hypotheses. A
physical theory, we could argue, can never be proved, but only
disproved. Every piece of evidence in its favor only serves to make it
more likely, but no evidence could ever make it certain. 

**Conclusions**

Only philosophy, in its yearning for certainty, has tried to suggest
that there is such a thing as a law of cause and effect.

[Science rests content in making predictions based on experience without
claiming any kind of certainty or privileged reasoning to back these
predictions up]{.ul}.

Hume might then also defend his own philosophy, saying that he proceeds
according to a similar method.

**Section VI and Section VII, Part 1 **

**Summary **

Section VI is a short section entitled \"Of Probability.\" Hume asserts
that there is no such thing as chance in the workings of the universe,
but that our ignorance of the real causes of events leads us to a belief
in chance. Hume conjectures that belief differs from fiction simply in
this: what we believe is more forcefully imprinted upon our imagination
because it is more likely to arise. Belief, Hume asserts, is just what
is confirmed by experiment. 

In section VII, \"Of the Idea of Necessary Connection,\" Hume suggests
that no idea in metaphysics is more obscure and uncertain than what is
variously termed \"force,\" \"power,\" \"energy,\" or \"necessary
connection.\" As he has argued in section II, all ideas and complex
impressions are initially formed by simple impressions, which are vivid,
sensible, and unambiguous. For a complex idea like causation to have any
meaning, we must be able to trace it from the simple impression from
whence it is derived. 

Hume argues that there is no simple impression that could inform us of
necessary connection. He examines in turn our impressions of
interactions between two bodies, between mind and body, and within the
mind, and argues that in each case we do not perceive, by experiment or
reason, any secret power of necessary connection. 

Hume has already discussed the body-body interaction of billiard balls.
All we *observe* is that the motion of the first billiard ball is
followed by the motion of the second billiard ball: we
cannot *observe* the act of causation. Nor does the mind perceive the
workings of cause and effect: otherwise we could determine what effects
would follow from causes without ever having to rely on observation. 

Next, Hume looks at the mind-body interactions according to which an act
of volition can cause the movement of limbs. Hume points out that while
we are aware of our ability to move our body, we are by no means aware
of the connection between the act of volition and the bodily movement.
The connection between mind and body is poorly understood at best, nor
do we understand why we are so capable of moving, say, our fingers but
not of controlling, say, our heart. Furthermore, Hume points out that
there is a long chain of muscle and nerve reactions between the act of
volition and the movement of the body. Our mind wills that the arm
should move, but it actually produces a whole series of effects which it
in no way wills. 

Finally, Hume looks at mind-mind interactions, whereby we focus the mind
or produce ideas, and fails to locate any necessary connection. First,
he points out that we are unaware of how the mind can conjure an idea
out of nothing. Further, he points out that experience teaches us that
the mind has varying degrees of control, so that it has more power over
reason than the passions, or that it has greater self-command when it is
healthy. That we learn these things from experience suggests that we are
observing only a constant conjunction and not some necessary connection.

Hume goes on to examine and attack the occasionalist picture, which
suggests that what we perceive as \"causes\" are in fact \"occasions\"
and that God is the ultimate cause of all change. Considering the
limitations of the human intellect, Hume ponders what stroke of logic
could possibly produce such unsupported and outlandish conclusions.
Further, he questions how we might know the forces that are operated by
the mind of God if we cannot even decipher the forces that are operated
by our own minds and bodies. 

### Commentary  {#commentary}

The motivation behind Hume\'s brief discussion of probability might not
be readily apparent. Considering his emphasis on the scientific method,
we should not be surprised that Hume carries a deterministic worldview:
nothing that happens happens purely by chance. We may not be able to
predict the outcomes of dice rolls, but this is simply because we cannot
adequately calculate all the relevant factors. Hume will address the
difficult question of how free will might be reconciled with this
determinism in section VIII. 

Hume\'s determinism should suggest to us that his skepticism is
epistemological and not metaphysical. That is, Hume does not believe
that it is pure coincidence that billiard ball collisions always happen
in the same way. Rather, he believes that we are incapable of
rationalizing the causal connection. We might read Hume as saying that
everything that happens happens according to some sort of law or
necessity, but that these laws or necessities are beyond our
understanding. 

We invent the notion of probability and chance, Hume suggests, because
we cannot actually determine precisely how things will happen. These
probabilities are determined by experience. For instance, if car crashes
kill passengers 80 percent of the time, I will judge it highly probable
that a car crash will result in death. Other probabilities are 100
percent certain: for instance, flames always burn. This certainty does
not then result from observing directly some power of causation or
necessary connection, but comes instead from a calculation of
probability based on experience. Hume\'s discussion of probability
explains his tendency to see reasoning about matters of fact as
determined by habit and experience rather than by an understanding of
causation. 

A little more straightforward in its intent and methodology, section VII
returns to the central line of Hume\'s argument in the *Enquiry.* This
section is meant to establish what precisely we mean when we talk about
causation. 

Before we continue, perhaps we should clear up the distinction between
causation and necessary connection. Generally speaking, we can say that
A causes B if B temporally succeeds A, if A and B are spatially
contiguous, and if B always follows A. However, if I always hum while
striking a match, we can hardly say that my humming causes the match to
burst into flame, even though it satisfies all the above criteria.
Causation must also rely on some kind of necessary connection: the match
could still burst into flame if I didn\'t hum, but it couldn\'t burst
into flame if I didn\'t strike it. The question for Hume, then, is how
we can know or perceive this necessary connection. What is it about the
striking of the match and not my humming that connects to the match\'s
bursting into flame?

Section VI and Section VII, Part 1
----------------------------------

The first part of section VII could be read as the negative phase of
Hume\'s argument. With body-body, mind-body, and mind-mind interactions,
Hume shows that there is no evidence of necessary connection. If we knew
of necessary connection purely through reason, we would not need
experience to show us that two events are necessarily connected.
However, in each case, Hume shows us that it is experience that teaches
us of this connection. Furthermore, we do not actually experience the
necessary connection itself: we only infer it from the constant
conjunction that we observe between two events. Here, Hume\'s discussion
of probability comes in once more. We observe that in 100 percent of
cases, one billiard ball striking a second billiard ball is followed by
the movement of the second billiard ball. This observation leads us to
infer that there must be some necessary connection between the collision
and the movement of the second ball even though we cannot directly
observe that connection. 

That all ideas and complex impressions are derived from simple
impressions is central to Hume\'s thinking. For our idea of necessary
connection to have any coherence, it must be related to some simple
impression. However, Hume\'s arguments show us that there is no simple
impression that produces the idea of necessary connection. As we
mentioned before, Hume is not suggesting that it is pure coincidence
that the second billiard ball invariably moves when it is struck.
Instead, he is suggesting that whatever causal connection there might be
between the two events cannot be rationalized by us. 

At the end of the first part of section VII, Hume touches on
occasionalism, most famously represented by Nicolas Malebranche
(1638-1715). A proper discussion of occasionalism is beyond the scope of
the present commentary, but we should note that Hume displays a great
deal of intellectual courage and integrity in not shying away from the
skeptical consequences of his argument. Unfortunately, he was rewarded
for this with accusations of atheism that plagued him his entire life.

**Section VII, Part 2 **

**Summary **

It would appear, then, that we are incapable of apprehending any kind of
necessary connection between events. All we can intelligibly say is that
one event follows another. The same holds in body-body interactions,
mind-body interactions, and mind-mind interactions. Events may appear
conjoined, but never connected. And because there is no simple
impression related to necessary connection, it would seem that that term
is meaningless, both in philosophy and in common life. 

However, Hume does provide some positive response to the skepticism
presented in the first part of Section VII. If one event has invariably,
in our experience, followed another, we become quite confident in
predicting upon the appearance of the first event that the second will
follow, and we come to call the first event the \"cause\" and the second
event the \"effect.\" We feel these two events to be connected in the
imagination. Thus, when we say that two events are connected, we simply
mean that they have acquired a connection in our minds. This conclusion
is quite satisfactory to the skepticism Hume has been employing, since
the conclusion rests upon a certain weakness in human reason. 

The principle of cause and effect is crucial to science and one that we
should know if we claim to know anything. Yet we have no experience of
any kind of secret power or necessary connection in nature. All we can
claim is that some objects or events are constantly conjoined. Thus,
Hume provides two possible definitions of cause: the first is \"an
object, followed by another, and where all the objects similar to the
first, are followed by objects similar to the second\" and the second is
\"where, if the object had not been, the second \[would\] never ha\[ve\]
existed.\" Drawing on the connection created by our imagination between
cause and effect, Hume provides a third definition: \"an object followed
by another, and whose appearance always conveys the thought to that
other.\" 

**Commentary **

The second part of section VII provides us with a positive spin on the
skepticism we encountered in the first part regarding necessary
connection. Hume by no means suggests that we can rationalize necessary
connection, but he does provide some explanation for necessary
connection that might give some meaning to the term \"cause\" in both
philosophical and everyday discussions. 

The problem we encountered was that we could find no rational foundation
to our idea of necessary connection even though we all believe in it. To
be able to speak rationally about necessary connection, we needed to
identify some simple impression that the idea of necessary connection is
built upon. In the absence of such a simple impression, we had to
acknowledge that we could not speak rationally about necessary
connection. 

Hume\'s rescue effort here is to identify that, though there may be no
observable necessary connection in nature, the mind does imagine a
necessary connection between two events when it perceives that they are
constantly conjoined. We return once more to Hume\'s discussion of
probability in section VI. There he points out that belief is what
probability impresses upon the imagination. That is, if a certain event
follows from a certain other event with good regularity, that second
event impresses itself upon our imagination and leads us to believe that
that second event will indeed follow. If that second event invariably
follows from the first event, our belief becomes quite strong, and we
are led to create a necessary connection in our minds between the first
event and the second. Thus, the impression of the first event invariably
leads to the idea of the second event in our minds. We begin to speak of
the first event as \"causing\" the second event.

Section VII, Part 2
-------------------

The conclusion Hume reaches, then, is that we can perceive only constant
conjunction between two events, and not necessary connection. Constant
conjunction, to reiterate, is simply the observation that two events
seem to go together quite frequently. Necessary connection is the
perception of some connection between the two events that explains why
they go together. While Hume undercuts any rational basis for believing
in necessary connection, he suggests that the mind projects the idea of
necessary connection onto events that it observes to be constantly
conjoined. Our notion of causation is then not the combination of
constant conjunction and necessary connection, but rather the
combination of constant conjunction and the determination of thought
that conjures up the idea of necessary connection. 

Part 2 rescues us from the extreme skepticism of Part 1 by suggesting
that there is a way in which talk of necessary connection and causation
can be meaningful. Hume remains skeptical to the extent that he does not
believe in a necessary connection that outstrips constant conjunction.
While he concludes that we can speak meaningfully about causation and
necessary connection, these terms have been limited to the extent that
they now bear no more metaphysical weight than talk about constant
conjunction. To talk about causes or necessary connections is no more
than to talk about the combination of constant conjunction and a
determination in our thoughts. As a result, it is not clear how we can
meaningfully speak about a metaphysical connection between two events
that goes beyond their constant conjunction and the belief that there is
some necessary connection. 

We might want to say \"yes, I may not perceive the necessary connection
between a flame and its power to burn, but there is something more than
simply a constant conjunction between the flame and the burning.\"
Hume\'s argument is that there is no intelligible way to talk about that
\"something.\" We cannot call it a cause, since he has reduced the term
\"cause\" to being a combination of constant conjunction and a
determination of thought. If all our terms must be reducible to simple
impressions, and if there is no simple impression of that \"something\"
which connects cause and effect, then there is no intelligible way to
talk about cause and effect that goes beyond Hume\'s somewhat
unsatisfying limitations.

**Section VIII, Part 1 **

**Summary **

Hume turns his considerations of necessary connection toward the topic
\"Of Liberty and Necessity,\" the title of section VIII. He suggests
that the debate and controversy regarding free will and determinism is
simply a matter of the disputants not having properly defined their
terms. In fact, he asserts, all people would find themselves of the same
opinion on this subject if only they were more careful in their
definitions. 

Hume begins by examining what we call necessity in physical processes.
We are apt to suppose that there are laws in nature that determine the
necessary forces, causes, and effects that determine the movements of
all bodies without exception. However, as Hume has discussed, our ideas
of necessary connection and causation result only from the observation
of constant conjunction between events and a certain determination of
our minds. We infer the idea of necessary connection, but nowhere
observe it directly in nature. 

Next, Hume considers human nature and the laws that govern our behavior.
Similarly, he finds that throughout history and across cultures our
behavior remains relatively constant. Similar motives produce similar
actions and similar causes produce similar events. What we call \"human
nature\" springs from a certain regularity that we observe in human
behavior in all sorts of circumstances. 

If we observe a physical phenomenon that runs counter to our
expectations, we will not suppose that the laws of physics have been
suspended, but simply that some unobserved and contrary force must also
have been acting that upset our predictions. Hume suggests that we might
similarly explain the unexpected behavior of people. Rather than
perceive them acting at random, we might suppose that there is some
hidden motive or unknown personality trait that makes them act contrary
to our expectations. 

Thus, people, just as much as physical objects, can be understood to
behave in accordance with strict laws and principles that we might claim
to understand. Everyone would agree that we predict and infer regarding
human behavior based on certain observed regularities just as much as we
do with dead matter. Our entire behavior is directed by certain
expectations of the behavior of others so that, for instance, the farmer
would not work the land and put his crops up for sale if he did not
expect other people to pay a fair price for them. 

Hume suggests that any opposition to this view has sprung from the false
supposition that we can perceive necessary connections in nature. Our
inferences regarding human nature are based solely on the observation of
constant conjunction, and we would strongly deny that any kind of
necessity governs our actions. However, if we grant that we observe no
necessary connection governing physical phenomena either, we might see
that our predictions of human behavior and physical behavior reduce to a
similar set of observations. Necessary connection, be it in matter or in
human behavior, is not found in the object itself, but in the
imagination of the observer.

**Section VIII, Part 1**

Liberty or free will, then, does not depend on actions being
disconnected from their motives. Rather, it means simply that actions
depend on determinations of the will. Liberty, then, should be
contrasted with constraint\--the inability to obey one\'s own
will\--rather than with necessity. 

**Commentary **

The debate regarding the compatibility of free will (liberty) and
determinism (necessity) has a long and distinguished history in ethics,
and is perpetuated even today. The question under debate is how we can
reconcile, on the one hand, the view that all events are causally
necessitated (determinism) and the on the other hand, the view that in
any given situation, a person could have behaved otherwise (free will).
If all events are causally necessitated, argues that incompatibilist,
then human actions must also be causally necessitated, and if human
actions are causally necessitated, then people could not possibly behave
other than they do. Thus, the incompatibilist argues, free will and
determinism are incompatible (hence a proponent of this argument is
called an \"incompatibilist\"). 

The incompatibilist picture raises some serious issues for either
metaphysics or ethics. Hard determinists reject the idea that humans
have free will, which raises the ethical question of how we can be held
responsible for our actions. If I could not have behaved otherwise, how
can you blame me for my actions? Libertarians reject the idea that
determinism is true, which raises serious metaphysical problems
regarding necessity and order in the universe. 

Hume places himself firmly in the compatibilist camp on the free
will/determinism debate, arguing that the two notions can be reconciled.
Such a position relies on defining free will and determinism in such a
way as to avoid the logic of the incompatibilist position. 

Hume\'s trick lies in altering our conception of a deterministic
universe. According to Hume, the incompatibilist picture of determinism
claims the existence of causation or necessary connection in physical
interactions that we deny exist in human behavior. In previous sections,
Hume has argued quite forcefully against this picture, suggesting
instead that we can observe only constant conjunction, and not necessary
connection, in nature. Our idea of necessity derives only from a
determination in our thoughts to perceive two events as connected. Thus,
for Hume, determinism ceases to rely on events being causally
necessitated, and relies only on our perception of them as being
causally necessitated. 

Hume also redefines free will in order to render it compatible with this
new conception of determinism. Rather than contrast it with determinism
as the freedom to have acted otherwise, Hume contrasts it with
constraint as the ability to act in accordance with one\'s will. An
action is free, not if it could have been otherwise (which raises the
metaphysical question of what is meant by this \"could\") but if we can
claim that the action was performed in accordance with our will, if we
can say \"I chose to do *x.*\" 

Section VIII, Part 1
--------------------

Hume reconciles free will and determinism by drawing on his deflation of
causal necessity that has dominated the *Enquiry.* This section could be
read as a display of the force to which he can put the arguments he has
previously set out. If there is no necessary connection, but only
constant conjunction, between physical events, then physical events are
on a level with human behavior. In both cases we observe certain
regularities, make predictions regarding future outcomes, and act
according to those predictions. The more our predictions prove correct,
the more confident we become in making predictions in that domain. Thus,
the difference between our certainty that fire will burn and that liars
will deceive is only a matter of degree as to how regular our past
observations of fire and liars have been. Fundamentally, our predictions
concerning the one are the same kind as our predictions concerning the
other. 

Hume\'s conception of human nature, while not necessarily mistaken, is
unmistakably rooted in the environment of eighteenth-century
Enlightenment thought. Enlightenment thinkers believed firmly in the
uniformity and universality of human reason, that all people
fundamentally are the same and think the same. Thus, correct reasoning
should be universally applicable and heeded. Postmodern thinking tends
to hold a far more skeptical and relativistic position toward human
reason, suggesting that what might be true for me might not be true for
someone else. Hume\'s assertion that all human behavior follows from the
same motives and causes might be held to closer scrutiny today than it
was in his day. The relative merits and defects of the Enlightenment
view versus the Postmodern view is beyond the scope of this commentary,
but can make for some very lively debate between friends.

**Section VIII, Part 2 and Section IX **

**Summary **

Hume asserts that the compatibilist picture he formulated in Part 1 of
section VIII is both consistent with and essential to our common
understanding of morality. Our behavior is guided by motives according
to which we pursue rewards and avoid punishments. Hume suggests that we
might look upon these motives as causes for our actions, following
seemingly necessarily from our characters and natures. We blame people
not for bad actions, which are fleeting, but for the motives and causes
that lead them to act badly. People are considered wicked if their bad
actions seem to be motivated by a bad necessity or cause that springs
from their nature. The libertarian incompatibilist that denies necessity
must thereby deny also our sole criterion for praise or blame.
Similarly, the hard determinist that denies free will must deny that our
actions are rooted in our characters, which would also render us
blameless. Only a compatibilist picture that reconciles free will with
determinism can be consistent with the standard assumptions of moral
practice. 

Next, Hume faces two possible objections relating to God as being the
sole author of all deeds. The first objection is that there can be no
bad actions in the universe, since a perfect God is the ultimate cause
of all actions. Actions that may appear bad to us would in fact appear
good if we could see them in the wider context of God\'s creation as a
whole. Hume counters this objection by pointing out that our sentiments
of praise and blame come not from some sympathy with God\'s ultimate
purpose but from what promotes peace and security, or disorder and
unhappiness, in human affairs. While philosophy or religion might show
that everything is ultimately for the best, our moral sentiments are
governed not by metaphysical speculations but by the natural sentiments
of the human mind. 

The second objections is that if we deny that everything in the universe
is as it ought to be, we are ultimately placing some blame upon God.
Either God\'s powers are limited, or he is responsible for creating all
the evil that is present in the universe. Hume remarks that such an
objection is beyond the scope of philosophy. We have enough difficulty
understanding the workings of the human mind and common life. To delve
into the mysteries of God\'s will and motives is sure to entangle us in
a web of uncertainty and error. 

Section IX of the *Enquiry* is a short section entitled \"Of the Reason
of Animals.\" Hume suggests that we reason by analogy, linking similar
causes and similar effects. He suggests that his theories regarding
human understanding might then be well supported if we could find
something analogous to be true with regard to animal understanding. He
identifies two respects in which this analogy holds. First, animals,
just like humans, learn from experience and come to infer causal
connections between events. Second, animals certainly do not learn to
make these inferences by means of reason or argument. Nor do children,
and nor, Hume argues, do adults or even philosophers. We infer effects
from causes not by means of human reason, but through a species of
belief, whereby the imagination comes to perceive some sort of necessary
connection between cause and effect. We often admire the innate
instincts of animals that help them get by, and Hume suggests that our
ability to infer causal connections is a similar kind of instinct. 

**Commentary **

In these pages, we gain a clear insight into Hume\'s naturalist and
anti- rationalist thinking. Rather than follow in the tradition of
rationalist philosophy and try to uncover the mysteries of the universe
according to a priori reasoning, Hume abandons all pretensions to
knowing truths that transcend experience. He does not try to detect the
origins of many of our common sense or philosophical notions in the
secret workings of the universe, but asks instead how they arise in us. 

For instance, Hume\'s explanation of moral judgments at the end of
section VIII is based purely on observations of our natural behavior. We
judge something to be good because it promotes happiness, security,
peace, or what have you, and we judge something to be bad because it
promotes the opposite of what we consider to be beneficial. Hume does
not deny that there may be some God with some ultimate purpose and some
ultimate sense of right and wrong so much as he denies that this is the
origin of our own ideas of right and wrong. Rationalist philosophers
such as \#\#Descartes\#\# and Leibniz worked very hard to reconcile
metaphysics and ethics, developing metaphysical systems that explained
God\'s presence and role in the universe, and inferred principles of
right and wrong from this metaphysics. Hume concedes that all may be for
the best in the universe when considered in the wider context of God\'s
creation, but points out that our understanding of morality is not based
on this wider context. In this way and others, Hume steers away from the
metaphysical and toward the empirical in examining ethics. Modern
ethics, for the most part, has taken this line of thinking, seeing the
principles of morality as founded ultimately in human reason and human
action rather than in the workings of the universe.

Hume also follows a naturalist line in examining reason in animals.
Rather than perceive reason as a special faculty of the human mind that
allows us to see into the truth, Hume interprets reason as a faculty
that has arisen naturally, one that helps us get by in the practical
world. Animals, too, have this ability to reason, and we find it most
distinctly in our inferences from causes to effects. As Hume has argued
already, these inferences are not rationally justified, but are, rather,
useful determinations of thought. In this section, he goes so far as to
liken them with instincts. Human reason then differs from animal reason
only in the sharpness and precision of our ability to infer necessary
connections in nature and to think about them. 

We might identify this argument with the skeptical line in Hume\'s
thought. Contrary to rationalist philosophy, Hume argues that our reason
is not a truth- tracking device that can a priori understand the many
mysteries of the universe. Rather, it is simply a tool that guides us
through life. All our higher reasoning is based on perceiving necessary
connections in nature, and yet we never perceive any necessary
connections that go beyond constant conjunction. Thus, our higher
reasoning has no more rational justification than that of animals.

**Section X **

**Summary **

In this section, entitled \"Of Miracles,\" Hume argues that we have no
compelling reason even to believe in miracles, and certainly not to
consider them foundational to religion. Our knowledge of miracles
derives exclusively from the testimony of others who claim to have seen
miracles. Since we receive this testimony secondhand from the experience
of others, we should treat it as less reliable than our own experience. 

Belief, Hume asserts, should be proportioned to evidence. In those cases
where all evidence points to one particular conclusion, we can be almost
certain that that conclusion is correct. However, when there is evidence
both for and against a certain conclusion, we can regard that conclusion
only with a certain degree of probability, to the extent to which the
evidence for it outweighs the evidence against it. 

In the case of miracles, our evidence in favor of their existence comes
from the testimony of witnesses, and our evidence against them comes
from their contrariety to the laws of nature. Both our faith in the
testimony of others and our knowledge of the laws of nature are founded
in experience. Human testimony tends to accord itself with reality, and
the laws of nature tend to be constant. Since a miracle, by definition,
is a violation of the laws of nature, it can only be credible to the
extent to which the testimony in its favor is more forceful than the
laws of nature that contradict it. 

Hume provides four reasons to think that there has never been sufficient
evidence in favor of a miracle to render it probable. First, no miracle
is supported by testimony of a sufficient number of trustworthy people
to rule out the possibility of falsehood. Second, while we should
normally believe that which most closely accords itself with past
experience, the sensations of surprise and wonder often lead us to
unreasonable beliefs. There are countless instances of tall tales of all
sorts that stem not from reasonable inquiry but from a love of wonder.
Third, Hume remarks that most reports of miraculous events occur amongst
barbarous or ignorant people, who may not be sophisticated enough to
disbelieve fabricated testimony. Fourth, since every religion claims the
veracity of its own miracles as against the miracles of every other
religion, the evidence of all other religions opposes the evidence in
favor of a miracle in any one particular religion. For instance, what a
Muslim might consider a miracle would be considered a heresy by anyone
of different faith. 

Hume asserts that no testimony can ever count as a probability, let
alone a proof, of the existence of miracles. All testimony in favor of
miracles is based in experience, and this same experience opposes this
testimony with contrary testimony and with the laws of nature. While God
may be all-powerful and could contradict the laws of nature, we cannot
ascribe any attributes or actions to him except for those that
experience teaches us. 

Hume concludes that religion is based in faith, not in reason. There is
no rational ground for trusting in miracles, and he suggests that all
the miracles found in the Bible are more likely the fabrications of
their authors than a true revelation of the facts. The same can be said
for prophecy as can be said for miracles. Religion is based in faith
because it requires a kind of miracle\--a willing subversion of our own
natural reason\--in order to assent to it.

### Commentary  {#commentary}

Hume\'s attack on miracles comes again from approaching the subject from
a naturalist, and not a metaphysical, viewpoint. Rather than inquire
into the nature of miracles themselves, Hume asks how our belief in
miracles might have arisen. He maintains that the only evidence we have
of their existence comes from the testimony of others and that the
testimony of others is just a kind of experience. Thus, our belief in
miracles is grounded in experience just as much as our belief in the
laws of nature or whatever else. Hume is not interested in questioning
the possibility of miracles actually arising so much as he is interested
in questioning the grounds according to which we justify them. 

Miracles are a direct contradiction of the laws of nature, which we also
infer from experience. Thus, experience provides us both with evidence
for and evidence against miracles, and there is nothing beyond
experience that can inform our judgment. We must then determine which
judgment experience renders more likely. Hume suggests that experience
has taught us to hold the laws of nature as most certain and
indubitable. On the other hand, we often find human testimony to be
mistaken, especially when dealing with supernatural matters. Since the
laws of nature are far more probable than the testimony of witnesses,
Hume suggests that we are never rationally justified in believing in
miracles. 

From these arguments, it is not hard to see why Hume was accused of
atheism. We should note, however, that he by no means denies the
validity of a great deal of religion. His attitude toward religion might
properly be understood as consistent with his attitude toward
metaphysics in general. Rather than deny its truth, Hume simply asserts
that it deals with matters that are beyond the capacity of human reason.
Miracles may exist, but we are rationally unjustified in believing in
them. Based simply on reason and experience, we would have to judge that
miracles do not exist. Hume accepts faith as an acceptable ground for
religious belief, but insists that religion should confine itself to
matters of faith and not pervert reason by trying to prove the
unprovable.

**Section XI **

**Summary **

Hume relates a conversation he had with a friend concerning the
opposition between speculative philosophy and religion. He suggests to
his friend that philosophy in ancient Greece and Rome was far better
able to flourish since it was less countered by religious superstition.
His friend replies that an Epicurus, known for disavowing traditional
religious beliefs, would still be able to defend himself reasonably
against religious zealots. In order to prove his point Hume\'s friend
presents an imaginary speech on Epicurus\' behalf made to the people of
Athens. 

Hume\'s friend, as Epicurus, suggests that religious philosophers have
strayed from their traditions, trying to prove the existence of God by
means of reason. Such a question, Epicurus insists, is beyond the
capacity of reason. His non- religious principles do not contradict
religious tradition, but merely suggest that religious traditions are
not founded in reason. 

Religious philosophy argues for God\'s existence from design. It
perceives a certain order in the universe that could not have arisen by
accident, and so infers the existence of God as an ordering principle.
This kind of reasoning\-- inferring by experience from effect to
cause\--requires that we infer no qualities in the cause beyond what are
requisite for producing the effect, and that we infer no further effects
from this cause beyond what we have observed already. Religious
philosophers often make the mistake of inferring the existence of God
from what they observe, and then inferring other, unobserved, effects
from this inference of God\'s existence. We can perhaps infer God\'s
existence from what we observe in the world, but we cannot then infer
some greater design or perfection in the world from our inference of
God\'s existence. Philosophers who claim to do so proceed not from
reason but from imagination. 

Hume objects that sometimes it is perfectly acceptable to infer further
effects from a cause that one has inferred from observed effects. For
instance, if we see a footprint in the sand, we can infer that it was
caused by a person walking on the beach. Furthermore, we can infer that
this person must have left other footprints as well, which have since
been erased by the waves. It seems perfectly reasonable to infer that
other footprints must have existed, and yet this inference comes from a
cause that itself has been inferred from other effects. 

Hume\'s friend replies that, in the case of the footprints, we can infer
that further footprints existed based on our wider knowledge of human
behavior. We know a great deal more about people than what we learn from
the one footprint\-- for instance, that people have two feet and usually
leave consecutive footprints. Once we infer that a person was walking
across the sand, we can bring to bear our wider knowledge of people and
infer further effects than the one we observe. Unlike people, however,
we know nothing of God beyond what we observe. We may infer his
existence from certain observed effects, but this inference will not
help us infer any further effects than what we have already observed.
Hume\'s friend asserts that God\'s divinity is too far beyond our
comprehension for us to reasonably ascribe any human motives to him. 

Hume also points out that reasoned inferences are drawn from observing
the constant conjunction between *species* of effects and *species* of
causes. The inference of the existence of God is singular in nature, and
thus the inference might be regarded with some suspicion.

Section XI
----------

### Commentary  {#commentary}

This section follows the previous section\'s attack on the religious
metaphysics of rationalist philosophy. Hume\'s thrust continues to be
that reason cannot lead us beyond what we find in experience. Our
beliefs in miracles, in an afterlife, in some ultimate purpose in the
universe, are all religious tenets that must be accepted or rejected on
faith. We are not necessarily wrong to infer God\'s existence from what
we observe in the world: this hypothesis is as good as any other. We go
wrong, however, from then inferring further facts about the world based
on this hypothesis. 

God, according to Hume\'s account, is what we call an empty hypothesis.
In order to clarify this term, perhaps we should first clarify Hume\'s
discussion of our inferences from effects to causes and from causes back
to effects. It is a common and reasonable practice to infer causes from
effects. If I wake up in the morning and see that the roads are wet, I
can safely infer that it rained during the night. Hume explains such
inferences in terms of constant conjunction: when we find that one event
habitually follows another event, we imagine a necessary connection
between them in our minds. My past experience shows that the roads tend
to be wet after it has rained, and usually remain dry otherwise, so my
mind draws a connection between wet roads and rain. 

I might also infer from cause to effect. For instance, if I see wet
roads and infer that it rained during the night, I may also infer that
the grass will be slippery. This inference is based on my experience of
a constant conjunction between rain and slippery grass: After it has
rained, and not otherwise, the grass tends to be slippery. Though I have
not directly observed the rain, I have reasonably inferred it from the
wetness of the road, and can reasonably infer also that the grass will
be slippery. 

My inference that the grass will be slippery is not inferred directly
from the wetness of the road but from my more extensive knowledge of
what happens when it rains. My experience with rain goes far beyond what
I have inferred from the wet road, and once I have inferred that it has
rained, I can draw on this more extensive experience in order to make
further inferences. 

Hume suggests that our inference of rain differs from our inference of
God\'s existence in that we have regularly observed rain directly and
come to associate a great many other things with it. On the other hand,
we have never observed God directly, and all we know about him is drawn
from the inferences we make. We know God only as the cause of the
effects we ascribe to him. God is an empty hypothesis since he is
posited only to explain certain phenomena that we might not otherwise be
able to explain. We have no direct knowledge of him, and so can ascribe
no qualities to him beyond those that we have observed in order to posit
his existence in the first place. Since God is an empty hypothesis, we
can say nothing about him beyond what we have observed in order to infer
his existence in the first place. 

Hume is treading on dangerous ground here, and he proceeds with caution.
Rather than present these arguments as his own, he presents them as a
friend\'s, and explicitly denies any responsibility for them. Further,
the friend presents the arguments through the voice of Epicurus,
distancing the argument from Hume one step further. There is constant
reference in the discussion to the danger of religious philosophy and
its confusion of religious tradition with a priori reasoning. Hume does
not want to condemn religion so much as to keep its superstitious
influence away from speculative philosophy.

**Section XII **

**Summary **

Hume distinguishes between two kinds of skepticism: antecedent and
consequent skepticism, both of which come in an extreme and a moderate
form.

-   He identifies the extreme form of skepticism with the universal
    doubt of \#\#Descartes\#\#, which calls into question all former
    opinions and even the testimony of the senses. No claim is
    acceptable to the Cartesian skeptic unless is can be deduced from
    some indubitable first principle. Hume suggests that, first, there
    is no first principle that is so self-evident as to be beyond doubt,
    and second, even if there were such a first principle, we couldn\'t
    advance beyond it, having not yet rescued from doubt our ability to
    reason deductively. 

-   Though this extreme antecedent skepticism is unworkable, Hume
    commends it in a more moderate form. It consists simply in forming
    unprejudiced opinions, progressing by small steps from sound first
    principles, and examining one\'s conclusions frequently and
    carefully. 

The skepticism of the *Enquiry* has been instead a kind of consequent
skepticism, that questions our habitual conclusions and judgments by
doubting the grounds on which they are secured.

Hume considers in particular the testimony of the senses, which suggests
to us the existence of a world external to and independent of our
senses. We are led by a powerful instinct to suppose that what our
senses report to us is an accurate representation of this external
world.

However, not only do our perceptions change as we move about in the
world, but there are cases of dreams or madness where our senses deceive
us entirely. We can only justify our belief in an external world through
experience, but experience cannot take us beyond the very perceptions
that we are calling into doubt.

Thus, Hume concludes, our belief in an external world is not rationally
justified. 

In its extreme form, consequent skepticism can lead us to complete
inaction. While philosophers tend to draw a distinction between
secondary qualities, such as color, sound, or texture, and primary
qualities, such as extension and solidity, our understanding of both is
dependent upon experience: we cannot conceive of an extended body that
has no color or shape. If we doubt the testimony of our senses, we have
no understanding of matter.

Similarly, mathematical reasoning can lead us to counter-intuitive
conclusions about space and time, presenting them to us as infinitely
divisible. Consequent skepticism also leads us to doubt causal
reasoning, since no conclusions that outstrip the observation of
constant conjunction are rationally justified. 

Such skepticism, however, dries up when we ask to what use we can put
it. We cannot help but reason causally, and to refuse to do so on the
basis of skeptical reasoning would lead us to desist from acting or
judging altogether. Our natural instincts cannot help but reinstate what
skeptical reasoning tries to dismantle. 

While this extreme form of consequent skepticism is clearly unlivable,
Hume again finds it useful in a more moderate form. Dogmatic and hasty
reasoning may be mitigated by a constant recognition that reasoning can
go astray and judgments should never be absolute.

-   Reasoning about relations of ideas can only teach us mathematical
    truths, and cannot lead us to more general metaphysical principles.

-   Reasoning about matters of fact is supported only by experience, and
    so we cannot provide logical proofs of the existence or
    non-existence of any entity.

The closing line of the *Enquiry* urges us to ask of any book: \"*Does
it contain any abstract reasoning concerning quantity of
number? No. Does it contain any experimental reasoning concerning matter
of fact and existence? No. Commit it then to the flames: For it can
contain nothing but sophistry and illusion*.\" 

###  {#section}

### Commentary   {#commentary}

This final section gives us a particularly clear understanding of
Hume\'s relationship with naturalism and skepticism.

While Hume concedes that certain irrefutable skeptical doubts can cast
our reasoning into grave danger, our natural instincts should ultimately
bail us out. 

Before examining the consequent skepticism that has run throughout
the *Enquiry,* we should briefly consider antecedent, or Cartesian,
skepticism.

Descartes opens the \#\#*Meditations*\#\# by calling into doubt all the
foundations of our judgments, in particular the testimony of the senses.
**The end of the First Meditation leaves us wondering if there is
anything certain at all**.

In the Second Meditation, **Descartes\' Meditator assures us that we
cannot doubt our own existence**, and from this bedrock of certainty
deduces the existence of God, of the external world, and all of
Cartesian metaphysics. 

Hume criticizes this approach, suggesting

-   first that there is no secure first principle that is beyond doubt,

-   and second that even if there were we could not proceed beyond it.

Existence and non-existence, Hume asserts, can be confirmed only in
experience, not through reason alone.

Reason can establish mathematical truths, but nothing more substantial,
and so the claim, \"I exist,\" requires empirical evidence.

Hume goes on to suggest that even if Descartes\' Meditator could prove
her own existence by means of pure reason, nothing else could be shown
to follow from this claim. Her powers of deductive reasoning have been
called into doubt, and so cannot be relied upon to deduce further
truths. 

Throughout the *Enquiry,* Hume has been employing a kind of consequent
skepticism, as opposed to Descartes\' antecedent skepticism.

Descartes\' skepticism is called \"antecedent\" because it demands some
firm starting point before any reasoning can begin. Hume\'s doubts, on
the other hand, arise in the course of his investigations into human
understanding.

Hume asks on what grounds we base our judgments and investigates their
rational justification. Finding certain holes in our normal procedures
(for instance, that our belief in necessary connection is not rationally
justified). Hume is led to a kind of consequent doubt of our mental
faculties. 

Hume takes this doubt a step further in arguing that our belief in an
external world is not rationally justified. All I know of the external
world is what my senses report to me, but these reports can often be
mistaken. Besides, they are only mental representations of external
objects, and not the objects themselves, and I have no rational
justification for inferring the existence of external objects based on
mental representations.

Thus, Hume concludes, we have insufficient evidence for the existence of
an external world. 

The extreme form of consequent skepticism concludes unhappily that none
of our judgments are rationally justified. The only sensible thing to do
in that case would be to suspend all judgment and to stop acting
altogether. If I have no reason to think one thing rather than another
or to do one thing rather than another, I am rendered completely
immobile.

Hume\'s naturalism rescues him from this extreme skepticism. While
neither our belief in an external world nor our belief in necessary
connection are rationally justified, custom and habit lead us
instinctually to accept them.

Skepticism is useful in that it places limitations on our reason and
makes us doubt what we might otherwise take for granted, but it is
ultimately unlivable.

I can doubt all I please in the comfort of my study, but in order to get
by in the world I must as least assume that there is an external world
and that my judgments and actions in that world make some sort of
difference. 

Naturalism makes skepticism livable by reinstating certain kinds of
thinking and reasoning as acceptable and trustworthy. Importantly,
though, naturalism only reinstates relations of ideas and matters of
fact, leaving metaphysics a little empty.

Relations of ideas deal only with mathematical truths and matters of
fact must be grounded in experience. Thus, a great deal of the subject
matter of rationalist metaphysics (the existence of God, the immortality
of the soul, the nature of matter, etc) is discarded.

We cannot answer such questions through reason alone, as a rationalist
would want, and there is nothing in experience that can point us
fruitfully toward any satisfying answers.

Thus, in the closing line of the *Enquiry,* Hume recommends that we
commit to flames all books that engage in such empty, metaphysical
speculations.
