---
updated: 2021-05-18T14:14:03.577012+02:00
---
[Karl Marx] (1818-1883) can be considered a classical economist even if he distanced himself from the classics in some ways. He stressed the importance of profit as a driver of economic development, and his analysis is focused on the study of social classes’ behavior.  
At the same time, Marx was quite different from classic scholars because he believed they were <u>unable to truly understand the capitalistic system and its implications for the working class</u>. Marx’s contributions were the product of the period he lived in, the “dark age of capitalism”, where factories were organized in a brutal way, and the organization was focused on exploiting workers.

<br>
<br>

## Mode of production
The aim of Marx’s work was to study society’s evolution, determined by transformations that concern the so-called mode of production (MP), also known as economic base.

It is composed of:
- **Productive forces** (PF): labor, raw materials, means of production, machinery, equipment, and production techniques (dynamic)
- **Relations of production** (RP): all <u>mechanisms regulating the use and ownership</u> of the means of work and production, and determining the distribution of the final output (static).

Each historical phase has always been characterized by a specific mode of production, maintained as long as there is <u>a balance between productive forces and relations of production</u>.  
In a period of economic development, changes within the PF break the balance between PF and RP. It follows a phase of crisis and social conflicts, which leads to a <u>change of the mode of production</u>. All major shifts in economic systems have been characterized by <u>class conflicts and struggles</u> generated by technological improvements.
The delicate balance between PF, RP, and Technological Innovations plays a different role in different types of societies:

<br>

### Primitive society

- **PF**: labor, as hunting and gathering with rather primitive tools.
- **RP**: focused on cooperation and the redistribution of output.
- The technological innovation that broke the balance between PF and RP was the **invention of agriculture**, which then leaded to a change in mode of production.

<br>

### Slave-based society

- **PF**: labor as rudimentary agricultural tools.
- **RP**: focused on private ownership of land, slavery, and the output property of the aristocratic upper class.
- The technological innovation that broke the balance was the <u>discovery of new agricultural production techniques</u>, which then lead to a change in mode of production.

<br>

### Feudal society

- **PF**: labor, which includes land, natural resources, and agricultural tools.
- **RP**: private ownership of land and natural resources. Here, laborers are partially free (they are called serfs), and a small fraction of agricultural output is their property.
- The breaking technological innovation was the **development of shipping**, the discover of **guns** and **steel**, which then lead to a change in mode of production.

<br>

### Mercantile Pre-Capitalistic society

**PF**: are constituted by labor, which includes peasant and factory workers in the cottage industry, land, natural resources, the use of advanced agricultural tools, and rudimentary equipment.
- **RP**: the private ownership of lands and means of production, the control of workforce, colonial exploitation of work and natural resources, and owning of the final product by farmers and/or merchant-capitalists.
- The technological innovation that broke the balance between and was the invention of the steam engine, which then lead to a change in mode of production.

<br>

### Capitalist society

- **PF**: labor, which includes factory workers, advanced machinery, and equipment.
- **RP**: the private ownership of means of production and of the workforce, and the private ownership of the final product of entrepreneurs.
- breakthrough innovation yet to be see.

<br>
<br>

## Surplus, profits and the exploitation of labor

### Pre-capitalistic systems

Pre-capitalist systems differ greatly from capitalist systems with regard to the circulation of commodities. In primitive, feudal, and simple mercantilist systems, <u>producers owned the means of production</u> and the output they obtained from this labor. In all of the pre-capitalist systems, <u>workers were a commodity</u>, therefore they could be traded for money.
In these economic systems, exchange on the market was <u>aimed at obtaining commodities</u> which satisfied needs that the limited specialization of labor could not satisfy directly. In pre-capitalist systems, the process of circulation of commodities can be seen as:

$$
C \rightarrow M \rightarrow C
$$

where $C$:= commodity and $M$:= money.

Commodities are exchanged for money in order to obtain other commodities and satisfy subsistence needs. 

<br>

### Capitalistic system

In a capitalist system, instead, <u>the means of production and the workforce are owned by capitalists</u>. The capitalist spends the available money to purchase means of production and workforce, which will be used to produce commodities, which in turn will be <u>sold to obtain money</u>. The process of circulation of commodities is:

$$
M \rightarrow C \rightarrow M + \Delta M
$$

Capitalists are driven exclusively by the formula above, as their objective is to accumulate more and more money, and they can earn $\Delta M > 0$ by exploiting workers.

The value of quantities is expressed in terms of the <u>quantity of labor</u> directly and indirectly <u>necessary to produce them</u>, as in the labor theory of value.

<br>

### Surplus

Imagine a workday production process in which all quantities are measured in terms of the time of labor necessary to produce them. In the first part of this workday, the worker produces goods with a value sufficient enough to repay his subsistence. The rest of the workday is <u>devoted to producing goods that are taken by the capitalist</u>. **Surplus value** is defined as <u>the amount of value produced by workers over and above the cost of their wages</u>.  
A firm that pursues maximum surplus must increase the second part of the workday by either <u>multiplying the length of the workday</u> or <u>reducing the amount of time necessary to pay for a laborer’s wage</u>, namely the first part of the workday. The surplus is generated because <u>the worker is paid less than the value of what they produce</u>.

However, the value of a commodity is not only given by the quantities of labor directly necessary to produce it. It is necessary to add the quantities of <u>labor needed to produce the raw materials and means of production</u> consumed in the production process; their value is transferred to the commodity. Marx used the term **constant capital** ($c$) to indicate the value of these goods consumed in the production process. The term “constant” indicates that <u>this value does not change</u> during the production process, but is preserved and transferred into the value of the final goods produced.
Only the labor force is able to transfer a value greater than its own (a surplus value) in the final goods produced. The value left by the capitalist with the <u>purpose of purchasing labor power</u> is called **variable capital** ($v$), which indicates that this value transfers both itself and surplus value into final goods.  
The final value of the produced good ($\lambda$) is:

$$
\lambda = \underbrace{L (1-h)}_{s} + \underbrace{hL}_{v} + \underbrace{\lambda k}_{c}
$$

Where:
- $h$ := the portion of a workday spent in producing the wage;
- $hL$ := quantity labor needed to produce the output composing the wage;
- $s = L(1-h)$ := labor exploited by capitalists to produce the output;

The rate of exploitation $\sigma$ is equal to the ratio between surplus and variable capital:

$$
\sigma = \frac{s}{v} = \frac{L(1-h)}{Lh} = \frac{1-h}{h} = \frac{1}{h} - 1
$$

$\sigma = 0$ when $h = 1$, namely when workers spend all the time working for themselves.  
From this equation, we obtain two other crucial indicators:
- the **profit rate** $\pi = \frac{s}{c+v}$, the ratio between the surplus and the amount of capital anticipated by capitalists;
- the **organic composition of capital** $q = \frac{c}{c+v}$, the ratio between the constant capital and the total amount of capital.

$$
\pi = \underbrace{\frac{s}{v}}_\sigma \cdot \underbrace{\frac{v}{v+c}}_{1-q} = \sigma(1-q)
$$

The profit rate increases as exploitation rate increases, and decreases as organic composition of capital increases.

<br>
<br>

## Profits and growth <b class="missing">+++</b>

The profit rate is an important variable in Marxian economics, as it represents a key determinant of capital accumulation an investment.

The growth rate of an economy is an accumulation of profit rate: ΔY/Y
The growth rate of the economic depends on the profit rate through the accumulation of capital. A rise in exploitation rate causes a rise in the growth rate of the economy; thus, a rise in organic composition of capital causes a fall in growth.
THE THREE LAWS OF MOTION OF CAPITALISM
The development process of the capitalist system is defined by 3 laws:
1. THE TENDENCY OF PROFIT RATE TO FALL
The equation of profit rate [π], which inclines organic capital [q] is the basis of this theory. In the long run, due to the introduction of new machines replacing labor, the organic composition of capital will grow, reducing profit. In order to avoid that some events may favor the increase of exploitation rate [σ]:
- AN EXTENSION OF THE WORKING DAY
- REDUCTION OF THE TIME SPENT IN PRODUCING WORKERS’ WAGES
- INCREASE IN THE PACE OF WORK TO INCREASE PRODUCTIVITY
- EXPANSION OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE TO IMPORTANT SUBSISTENCE GOODS
AT A LOWER PRICE
Of these four events, only the first produces an increase in the exploitation rate (σ) and profit rate (π) because, in other situations, we have an increase in surplus and a decrease in variable capital (v); this means we have a positive effect on the exploitation rate (σ), but, if variable capital (v) changes, this influences the organic composition of capital (q), and therefore the overall effect on profit rate (π) is uncertain.
2. THE INCREASED IMMISERATION OF THE WORKING CLASS
The wage rate that is formed on the market is governed by the level of unemployment that Marx defines as the “reserve army of labor”. This increases as the supply of labor increases, and decreases as the demand for labor increases.
The demand for labor depends positively on the organic composition of capital (q), and negatively on the production techniques adopted: if capital accumulation is high, the army of the unemployed shrinks, and the wage rate goes above the subsistence level.
This favorable situation for workers is temporary, however, because:
- The increase in the wage rate lowers the rate of profit, causing a reduction in investment in capital and thus in demand for labor.
- The increase in wage rate pushes firms to increase the introduction of new labor- replacing machines in the production process.
Both effects lead to an increase in the unemployed and a reduction of the wage rate. The rising level of unemployment is a defining feature of capitalist systems, and serves to keep wages at a subsistence level. Unemployment is caused by the development of the capitalist system.
The continuous increase in unemployment is the reason why, in this economy, workers live in misery. But historical data from the last century for developed countries shows a notable increase in real wages. Some authors have suggested that the theory of increasing immiseration of the working class should be interpreted in a relative sense: the workers would be worse off relative to that of the capitalist entrepreneurs.
                  
3. THE INCREASING CONCENTRATION OF CAPITAL
According to Marx, with the increase of capital accumulation, many self-employed workers (like artisans) are unable to compete with capitalists. They shut down their business activities and join the army of the unemployed.
As the accumulation process proceeds, large firms will be eliminated from the market. These firms will be absorbed by the most successful capitalists, a process is called capital concentration. The development of capitalist systems, as predicted by Marx, has effectively led to the formation of large concentrations of capital. An important aspect of modern economics is, in fact, the presence of very large multinational companies operating at a global level. Increase in class immiseration and capital concentration cause:
• The progressive immiseration of the working class and the simultaneous increase in the concentration of capital. This will eventually lead to a rebellion.
• The working class will be increasingly united and organized thanks to the capitalist production process.
• Revolution is the consequence, and capitalism will collapse leading to the formation of a more modern system: socialism
These three laws are the result of the capitalists’ desire to accumulate more and more money and replace workers with machines. This substitution process results in an increase in the organic composition of capital (q).
We may encounter limits in this system, called insurmountable limits: the day cannot exceed 24 hours, and workers can encounter health problems. For Marx, the value of constant capital can grow without any limit. The inevitable consequence is the fall to zero of the profit rate (π) and of its accumulation ΔY/Y.
This is a major flaw in Marx’s analysis: he did not consider that the organic capital q and the exploration rate σ are interrelated through variable capital v. An increase in organic composition (q) normally increases the physical productivity of labor. An increase in this reduces the socially necessary labor time required to produce the workers’ wage, and raises the rate of exploitation. Therefore, Marx has overlooked the fact that an increase in the organic composition of capital (q) normally entails an increase in the exploitation rate (σ). Thus, the fall in the rate of profit is not automatic.
THE REPRODUCTION SCHEMES AND CRISES
Similarly to Malthus, Marx did not accept Say’s law. He claimed that capitalists may decide to reduce the purchases of the means of production and of labor power in the perspective of not receiving adequate profits from the selling of goods. If, within the scheme M > C > M + ΔM, the ratio ΔM/M which measures the realised profits rate falls, capitalists might decide not to invest the money from the sales to produce new goods. Consequently, the demand for means of production and labor will decrease, determining a crisis of the system. It is due to the fall of the profit rate, not because workers are substituted with machines but because goods can be sold at a value that does not allow to obtain satisfactory profit. This is known as non-realisation of surplus value.
In order to solve the problem, Marx developed the reproduction schemes, an abstract representation of the economy by means of which he analysed the conditions enabling to sell goods at their fair value, namely the conditions necessary to guarantee equilibrium between demand and a supply both of consumer and investment goods in the system.
Marx distinguished between two types of reproduction schemes:
- Simple reproduction scheme: the net investment is zero and the system always reproduces at
the same constant level (=same level of output)
- Expanded reproduction scheme: the net investment is positive and the output produced
             increases over time.

NB. Net investment = total capital expenditures – the cost of means of production consumed during the production process
The simple reproduction scheme is based on the following assumptions:
1. The economy is closed
2. The economy is divided into two sectors: the one reproducing the means of production and
the one producing consumer goods
3. All products are sold at their values, measured in working hours (>theory of value)
4. There is no technical progress
5. The wages correspond to the subsistence level
6. The workers consume all the wages and the capitalists consume all the surplus value
7. The investment is only devoted to the machinery and the means consumed in the production
process
Now, we define the values of output of sector 1 and 2, y1 and y2, as:
y1 = c1 + v1 + s1 y2 = c2 + v2 + s2
Where:
- c = constant capital
- v = variable capital
- s = surplus
The equilibrium is found by balancing demand and supply in each sectors, resulting in: c2 = v1 + s1
If this condition is satisfied, the system is able to reproduce the same level of output in each period. Nonetheless, Marx argued that there was no certainty that the condition could be fulfilled. For instance, we know that c1 and c2 repress the value of capital stock consumed in production process 1 and 2. It is easy to imagine this condition as always satisfied if the age-structure of all machinery in the system is uniformly distributed. However, if the age-structure of the machines in the system is not uniform, then in some periods the demand for machines to be replaced will higher or lower in each sector. Thus, boom or crisis phases will arise
- In boom phases, the demand exceeds the supply, hence there are increases in the prices of investment and subsistence goods.
- In crisis phases, the supply exceeds the demand, hence economic activity is reduced and unemployment increases
The alternation of these phases in the capitalist system is the norm in the absence of uniformity in the age-structure of capital.
THE TRANSFORMATION OF VALUES INTO PRICES
The theory of exploitation is based upon labor theory of value to express the difference magnitudes in homogeneous terms. Indeed, Marx was aware that the exchange values of goods in the market did not correspond to the hours of labor necessary to produce them, but, on the contrary, they were based on the production prices. Therefore, Marx worked on the problem of the transformation of labor values into prices, known as theory of prices.
From the equations y1 = c1 + v1 + s1 and y2 = c2 + v2 + s2 it is possible to deduce that the profit rate of sector 1 and 2 can be calculated as follows:
              
π1 = σ1 (1 – q1) π1 = σ2 (1 – q2)
Agreeing with Smith and Ricardo, Marx assumed free competition among capitalists, which implies that:
- the rate of profit in the various sectors of the economy is the same
- wage rate, working day length and exploitation rate σ are identical in all sectors.
Therefore, in order to have π1 = π2, in the previous equation two more conditions must be fulfilled:
- q1 = q2
- technology must be identical in all sectors >> highly unrealistic
As a result, to have both a uniform rate of profit and different techniques of production, the labor embodied as a measure of value had to be abandoned. The new measure implied that the prices of production were directly derived from labor values by applying the same rate of profit in the two sectors.
However, also this solution has problems, for the ratio between the quantities of labor contained the commodities corresponds to the prices ration only if:
- σ = 0. This implies that also π = 0
- q is the same in both sectors
Ultimately, it can be noticed that Marx’s analysis of prices suffers form problems similar to those of Ricardo’s analysis: prices differ from values. In the face of such an issue, Marx sustained that:
- the labor theory of value, even if ineffective in this case, is useful to solve problems at the macro level, such as for the calculation of the GDP
- the labor theory of value can act as a theory of exploitation for the economy as a whole. At the aggregate level, profits are derived from surplus labor, reflecting the main contradiction of capitalism: the conflict between workers and capitalists, which emerges in the production process where exploitation takes place.
The mistake made by Marx in transforming values into prices was highlighted and mathematically corrected by Bortkiewicz in 1907. In fact, in the system the two commodities are exchanged according to the process of production when they are regarded as output, but they are evaluated at their labor values when used as inputs.

[Karl Marx]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karl_Marx 'Karl Marx on Wikipedia'