---
author: "ele"
---

[The American Revolution of 1776 ]{.c11}

[]{.c0}

1.  ### [Puritan eschatology, Lockean thought and neo-Roman republicanism]{.c9} {#h.58p48nj64h7c style="display:inline"}

[american colony settlers founded in the 17th century]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[puritan settlers]{.c7}[:]{.c0}

[organized themselves in joint stock companies (they organized the trip
and the organization of the future colony)]{.c0}

[governors were the heads of these companies]{.c0}

-   [a spiritual, entrepreneurial and religious elite of political
    aristocracy formed (ex. John Winthrop) ]{.c0}
-   [aim to build a new England in the new world]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[Lockean thought:]{.c0}

-   [political thought that will later be called liberal, argument for
    the popular rule of the commonwealth]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

["The natural liberty of man is to be free from any superior power on
earth and not to be under the will or legislative authority of man, but
to have only the law of nature for his rule. The liberty of man, in
society, is to be under no other legislative power but that established
by consent in the commonwealth ..."]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

2.  ### [ The conflict between the British crown and its American colonies ]{.c9} {#h.4linc89lpjnd style="display:inline"}

[abolitionist debate in Great Britain ]{.c10 .c7}

[a debate develops about the legitimacy of slave trade and slavery, and
the American settlers fear an abolitionist decree]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

1763 [- end of Seven years War:]{.c10 .c7}

[France cedes american territory except New Orlans to keep the caribbean
islands]{.c0}

[Spain keeps the territory west of the Mississippi and exchanges Florida
for Cuba]{.c0}

[Britain gains territories east of the Mississippi]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

1763 [- King George III proclamations:]{.c10 .c7}

[The king prohibits the extension of settlements west of the Appalachian
mountains]{.c0}

[religious freedom for the French Catholics of Louisiana]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

1767 - [Revenue Act:]{.c10 .c7}

[foresees new taxes on tea, glass, lead, paper. The colonial assemblies
protest: \"no taxation without representation\", because the colonies
didn't have representation in the british parliament]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

1773 - [Boston tea party]{.c7}[:]{.c0}

[In sign of protest against tea taxation American settlers symbolically
throw tons of tea overboard from ships of the East India Company]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

1774 - [Intolerable Acts]{.c7}[:]{.c0}

[Massachusetts stripped of self-government; colonies boycott British
goods. The Continental Congress and Congress meet for the first time
(representative body of the colonies and leading body of the USA)]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

3.  ### [The Declaration of Independence of 1776 and the Constitution of 1787 ]{.c9} {#h.wpt4mhi1cqd7 style="display:inline"}

1775 - [Begin of American Revolutionary war]{.c7}[:]{.c0}

[first armed conflict of the war on 17 June between British and American
troops. George Washington commander-in-chief of the Continental
Army]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

1776 -[ Continental Congress issues the Declaration of Independence on 4
July]{.c10 .c7}

[]{.c0}

[there was great resistence to the revolution especially from slaves
that were hoping for the abolition of slavery in Britain ]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

1777 - british and american loyalist forces [surrender at Saratoga on 13
October]{.c7 .c10}

[]{.c0}

1781 - [ratification of the Articles of Confederation]{.c7}[ on 1
March]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

1783 - [peace treaty of Paris]{.c7}[, international recognition]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

1787 - Constitutional Convention [adopts the American Constitution]{.c10
.c7}

[]{.c0}

1791 - the Congress votes the amendments ("[Bill of Rights]{.c7}[", core
of the constitution)]{.c0}

[           long process because every amendment had to be voted by the
founding colonies,               ]{.c0}

[           now states]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

4.  ### [Slavery before and after Independence ]{.c9} {#h.cv9lozyeb3ap style="display:inline"}

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  [Slavery before and after the independance]{.c4}

[]{.c0}

-   [slaveholder revolution:]{.c0}

[Gerald Hornes - says that africans in the colonies supported britain
for the abolitionism while the slaveholders feared the decree from
London]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[between the founding fathers of the United States there were important
slaveholders, freedom meant liberty to have slaves]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

-   [mixed impact of revolution on slavery:]{.c0}

[the revolution had a mixed impact]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

1.  [The American Revolution, centered on Americans\' right to control
    their property, including slaves, reinforced American commitment to
    slavery]{.c0}
2.  [slavery was challenged from Revolutionary ideals and from the
    evangelical religious commitment]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

-   [after the revolution:]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[in the North slavery was outlawed after the end of the war, but racism
persisted]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[in the south free black people increased but]{.c0}

1.  [in South Carolina and Georgia the elite became stronger]{.c0}
2.  [in 1845 texas reintroduced slavery]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[B) Slavery and the aftermath of slavery]{.c4}

[]{.c4}

[slavery was abolish in the United States after the American Civil War
(1861-1865) between the 11 Confederate states against the Union]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[1865: emancipation of the african american people with the 13th
amendment (formation of  ]{.c0}

[          secret societies like the Klu Klux Klan) ]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[1875: state law mostly in the South establish a de facto aparthaid in
the USA]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[under the pressure of the Civil Rights Movement in the 50s and early
60s, the government writes the Civil Rights Act to overcome the so
called "Jim Crows Laws"]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[exception for slavery: incarcerated people as forced labour]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[in the 90s mass incarceration became a popular phenomenon (25% of the
world population)]{.c0}

-   [prisons were privatized, making them a source of profit]{.c0}
-   [sponsor of these legislations: Joe Biden]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

5.  ### [Westward expansion and native population  ]{.c9} {#h.ldegwne101g0 style="display:inline"}

[when the United States were founded the comprised about 15% of the
present territory, with the revolution the process of territorial
expansion began]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[the revolution was already part of the process since with the Treaty of
paris they got land]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[the land south and west was obtained through wars and peaceful treaties
with Mexico and Britain]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

-   [alaska was purchased in the 1860s by the Russian Empire]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[the expansion at the cost of native americans was considered a right
because they had no notion of private property of land, so they were
considered the illegals and driven into reserves (systematic
genocide)]{.c0}

6.  ### [Democratic representation and social structure]{.c9} {#h.mmp2t63ex284 style="display:inline"}

[american constitution = social structure + tradition of political
thought of the 18th century (social contract, rule of the law,
republicanism)]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[social structure: slaves, free blacks, farmers (living in small farms),
middle class (lawyers and doctors), gentry (landowners, merchants)]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[all attempts at recreating a society like the ancien regime into the
colonies failed]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[there was an egalitarian right to vote, representation and
representative bodies, self government of the colonies]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[the people elected the president which is a sort of king controlled by
judicial powers and elected body of congress (idea inspired by the idea
of law)]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[participation right to vote:]{.c0}

-   [limited to males and not unlimited (white male citizens could vote
    depending on the legislation of the state)]{.c0}
-   [black, poor white, natives and women etc. were excluded ]{.c0}
-   [this system was still much more inclusive than european
    states]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

7.  ### [Knowledge check]{.c9} {#h.ubzmkz2famt4 style="display:inline"}

[]{.c0}

1.  [What was the religious and philosophical background of English
    settlers?]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

2.  [What were the contingent issues that gave rise to revolutionary
    upheaval?]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

3.  [To which philosophical sources relate the Declaration and the
    Constitution?]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

4.  [Could the legal conditions of slaves immediately benefit from
    Independence?]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

5.  [On which philosophical ground westward expansion was considered a
    \"right\"?]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

6.  [How comprehensive were the rights for political
    participation?]{.c0}

[]{.c0}

[]{.c0}
