What is Empire, what is Imperialism.

If may make sense to distinguish empire from other forms of statehoods. It inglobes pre-existing structures and whole states, leaving the internal organization unchanged. Inclusive ideology. Not valid for Alexander empires. Categories and labels formed by occidental culture and occidental way of thinking. Empires existed also outside the European world.

Parallelism with Christianity: in XVIII century France was eager to extend its influence in East Asia, it then created private companies of missionaries

# European timeline 1914-2003

All the developments across the world are strictly related.

The long XIX century vs the short XIX century. The “end of history”: the final stage of human evolution, an ending point to struggles.

Nevetheless, this is false: major changes continue to happen, and major hopes continue to be deluded.

- The Russian Revolution
- The economical crisis of 1929: a period of protectionism started, and market recovered in the 70s, when according to Baldwin Martin the new wave of globalization started
- WWII: a minority considers Japan's attack to China in 1927 the actual beginning of the conflict
    - the extermination of minorities
    - decolonialization among the results. +++
- Neocolonialism: influences from countries officially independent
- Vietnam War mid 70s
- Nigerian War mid 60s
- Oil crisis: the oil price rose several times, up to then, countries who had these resources were poor because companies left almost nothing to local economy +++
- Collapse of Communism
- +++

